Brendan Bowler (PI) Quang Tran (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Texas, Austin  
19-ASTRO20-0142, Determining the Evolution and Migration of Young Giant Planets 
 
Overview: 
 
This proposal seeks support for a novel precise radial velocity survey of intermediate-age (50– 250 Myr) Sun-line (GK) stars with the near-infrared Habitable-Zone Planet Finder (HPF) spectrograph at the 10-meter Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET). The primary goal of this program is to establish the frequency of giant planets interior to the water ice line (~2.5 AU) around young Sun-like stars, which will be directly compared with existing measurements for older field stars to determine how and when giant planets undergo inward orbital migration. The major science goals of this program are to: (1) provide strong constraints on the migration pathway and timescale of hot and warm Jupiters, (2) measure the occurrence rate and mass-period distribution of young planets for the first time, (3) determine intrinsic near-infrared jitter levels for Sun-like stars at these ages, and (4) discover young planets and long-term accelerations for follow-up imaging and spectroscopic characterization with the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) and the Extremely Large Telescopes (ELTs). 
 
HPF is a unique fiber-fed high-resolution spectrograph operating from 0.81-1.27 microns. It was installed at the HET in 2018 and has already demonstrated a binned RV precision of 1.5 m/s using a laser frequency comb for precise wavelength calibration—the best stability of any highresolution near-infrared spectrograph currently in operation. By moving to near-infrared wavelengths, photosphere-to-starspot contrasts are reduced and stellar variations (“jitter”) are sufficiently mitigated to probe planetary masses at these intermediate ages. 
 
Measuring the Timescale of Giant Planet Migration: 
 
In the prevailing model of giant planet formation, massive protoplanetary cores—the seeds of gas giants—preferentially assemble beyond the water ice line. For Sun-like stars this occurs beyond  2.5 AU, but giant planets appear to be remarkably common at smaller separations around old (several Gyr) field stars. Several scenarios can account for this population: diskdriven migration, dynamical migration, or, in special circumstances, in situ formation. These migration mechanisms operate over a wide range of timescales from ~1 Myr to ~1 Gyr. Mapping when giant planets migrate is the key to establishing how they migrate. 
 
The primary goal of this program is to determine the frequency of Jovian-size planets (0.3–10 MJup) within 2.5 AU around single, young, Sun-like stars. Comparing this to the wellestablished values at old ages will directly constrain how the orbital architectures of planetary systems change over time. If the frequency of planets is lower at young ages, migration must occur slowly which rules out disk-driven processes as the dominant mechanism. If the frequency is consistent with older stars, migration is rapid which implies inspiraling within a disk, rapid dynamical processes, or in situ formation. If the occurrence rate is higher, giant planets must rapidly arrive or form at small separations, and then undergo orbital decay, collisions, or ejections within a few Gyr. Altogether, this work will address one of the major open questions in planet formation since the discovery of the first exoplanet around a Sun-like star: the origin of giant planets found at small orbital distances. 
 
Relevance to NASA’s Objectives: 
 
This study is directly related to several of NASA’s Astrophysics Research Program solicitation. I will search for exoplanets orbiting young stars with radial velocities to identify when giant planets migrate inward through their habitable zones to small separations. I will also identify young stars with radial accelerations which are excellent targets for follow-up using the James Webb Space Telescope. Finally, results from this work will improve the understanding of the origin, architectures, and evolution of giant planetary systems." 
 
 
Courtney Dressing (PI) Steven Giacalone (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Berkeley  
19-ASTRO20-0092, Constraining the Occurrence and Dynamical Histories of Close-in Giant Planets around A Stars with TESS 
 
The Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) is revolutionizing the field of exoplanet science by searching for transiting planets around all bright stars across nearly the entire sky. Unlike the Kepler Space Telescope, which carefully selected its targets to constrain the frequency of Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars, TESS is focused on characterizing shortperiod planets around stars of various spectral types. In particular, TESS provides the first opportunity to search for transiting planets around A stars. The discovery of such planets would greatly improve our understanding of the relationship between planet occurrence rate and host star properties, which as of now is only informed by studies of FGKM dwarfs, as well as provide insight to planet formation and evolution mechanisms around hot stars. 
 
I propose to use TESS Full Frame Images (FFIs) to find planets of size 4-11 Earth radii with orbital periods under 10 days (close-in giant planets) around A stars to explore their occurrence rate and dynamical histories. To find these planets, I will use a pipeline designed to detect planet candidates in TESS FFIs. Next, I will obtain follow-up observations, including high resolution images and spectra, of candidate hosts to measure their metallicities, search for unresolved stellar companions, and constrain their spin-orbit alignments. I will then use these observations in tandem with a custom-made TESS validation tool to determine which candidates are bona fide planets and which candidates are false positives. Next, I will calculate the completeness of my pipeline by injecting artificial transits into TESS data and testing its ability to recover them, the reliability of my pipeline by determining the frequency with which it incorrectly identifies transiting planet candidates, and the false positive rate of my planet candidate sample by determining how frequently planet candidates turn out to be false positives according to followup observations. Using these results, I will conduct a robust occurrence rate study to constrain how common close-in giant planets are around A stars and how occurrence varies with host metallicity and multiplicity. Lastly, I will run dynamical simulations to determine what planet migration mechanisms can produce the systems I discover. 
 
Using this procedure, I anticipate detecting approximately 9 of these planets around A stars using currently available TESS data. This planet yield will increase if data from future TESS observation sectors are included. The discovery of these planets and my subsequent analyses will improve our understanding of the relation between planetary populations and host star properties and shed light on planet formation and evolution processes. This project will thus directly benefit the Exoplanet Exploration Program under the Astrophysical Research Program of the NASA 2014 SMD Science Plan, which is primarily focused on discovering planets around other stars and characterizing planet-hosting stars. 
 
 
Daniel Fabrycky (PI) Gregory Gilbert (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Chicago  
19-ASTRO20-0137, Uniform transit timing measurements for exoplanets from Kepler, K2, and TESS 
 
I propose to make uniform high-precision measurements of transit timing variations (TTVs) and transit duration variations (TDVs) for all planet candidates observed by Kepler, K2, and TESS, with an expected yield of nearly 100 previously undetected TTVs or TDVs. These timing measurements can be inverted using dynamical models to produce a large statistical sample of planetary masses, filling out the mass-radius diagram. My sophisticated transit fitting pipeline corrects for instrumental and asteroseismic noise using a multi-component Gaussian Process (GP) regression. I identify and correct for common noise modes which lead to fluctuations of order 10% of a transit depth for a Super-Earth orbiting a Sun-like star. I couple this noise model to a hierarchical Bayesian framework and recover the highest-fidelity measurements of TTVs and TDVs produced to date, as well as more reliable constraints on planetary inclinations and eccentricities. Measuring the statistical distribution of masses, eccentricities, and inclinations will lead to better understanding of the processes that shape planetary system formation, dynamics, and evolution. 
 
 
Brian Fleming (PI) Emily Witt (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-ASTRO20-0037, Exploring the Interface Regions Between Supernova Shock Fronts and the Ambient ISM with Far-UV Integral Field Spectroscopy 
 
Supernovae are a key part of how material and energy is processed in galaxies, impacting star formation and feedback processes in the interstellar medium (ISM) and circumgalactic medium (CGM). How material from the supernova and the ambient ISM interact, however, is not well understood. In particular, understanding how shocks progress from radiative to non-radiative as material propagates and how carbon is depleted along these shock fronts is key to understanding how material is processed in these environments. Previous studies have been hampered by the available instrumentation in the far ultraviolet (FUV) which is host to important spectral lines (e.g. O VI and C IV) that are crucial probes of these processes. By building the INtegral Field Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Experiment (INFUSE) sounding rocket payload using new and improved FUV instrumentation and observing the XA region of the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant (SNR), we will for the first time be able to resolve the shock fronts spectrally and spatially to a degree that will allow in depth study of the shocks as they propagate through the ISM. The study of SNRs and how they effect their host galaxies supports the objectives of the Astrophysics research program to explore the universe and the origin, evolution, and structure of the galaxy. This work will also train a future investigator in leading an instrumentation project. 
 
 
Jonathan Grindlay (PI) Daniel Violette (FI) 
Institution:  Harvard College  
19-ASTRO20-0014, Characterization and optimization of CdZnTe low energy threshold for the HREXI SmallSAT Prototype 
 
The High-Resolution Energetic X-ray Imager SmallSat Pathfinder (HSP) is a proposed (2019 SMEX-MO) wide-field (25o x 25o), hard X-ray (5-200 keV) coded aperture telescope to demonstrate how a SmallSat Constellation covering full sky would revolutionize high-energy time-domain astrophysics. HSP seeks to detect long gamma ray bursts (GRBs) at redshifts greater than 6-8 to probe the star formation rate during the epoch of re-ionization, rapidly localize short GRBs resulting from neutron star mergers with neutron stars and black holes, and search for faint undiscovered quiescent black hole low mass X-ray binaries and “juvenile” black hole high mass X-ray binaries. The spectral signatures of all these phenomena fall off as a power law with photon index ~2, thereby motivating the extension of HSP’s hard x-ray band coverage to lower energies.  
 
The prime objective of this proposal is to extend HSP’s energy band below 5 keV by tuning its ASIC detector readout. To achieve this goal, a thermal vacuum chamber, recently assembled, will be brought online to simulate HSP’s nominal operating conditions (0o C) and provide a controlled lower temperature range for HSP’s CdZnTe (CZT) detectors, each bonded to their readout ASIC. HSP’s closely tiled array of 12 x 12 CZT crystal detectors, each with 32x32 pixel output channels bonded to corresponding 32 x 32 input pixels on the ASIC, must be individually “tuned” to achieve comparable low energy response and uniformity across the detector. This was done manually (very time consuming) for the 8 CZT detectors and identical ASICs in two 2 x 2 detector arrays on the Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR). For wide-field instruments with large detector arrays, this tuning must become an automatic operation. 
 
This proposed project will develop the hardware, software and FPGA firmware necessary to drive an automated optimization process that identifies the combination of ASIC parameters (primarily time constants of the preamplifier and shaper amplifier) that maximizes energy resolution, sensitivity and low-energy threshold across each 32 x 32 pixel detector. The expected lower energy limit achievable with HSP’s detector readout is 2 keV as was achieved manually for NuSTAR. Completing the optimization pipeline will greatly streamline integration and testing of HSP’s detector array while strengthening HSP’s sensitivity and resolution (both energy and spatial) by smoothing pixel-pixel variations. The techniques and software developed here may be generalized for use in the tuning and optimization of future CZT or CMOS detector arrays utilized in astrophysics, medical imaging or Homeland Security applications. 
 
 
Nils Halverson (PI) Joanna Perido (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-ASTRO20-0136, Extending KIDs to the Mid-IR for Current and Future NASA Observatories 
 
A strategic objective identified in NASA’s SMD 2014 Science Plan is to explore the origin and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planets that make up the universe [1]. To do so we must answer questions such as: what physical processes have governed galaxy evolution over cosmic time? A reliable method/measure to address this question is to study the mid- and far-infrared (IR) spectra of galaxies. From these spectra the correlations of star-formation rates with other physical properties can be investigated to expand our understanding of galaxy evolution. These mid- and far-IR observations require large arrays of multi-frequency, sensitive detectors. The Galaxy Evolution Probe (GEP) is a concept for a Probe-class space observatory with the goal to address this question by utilizing aluminum kinetic inductance detectors (KIDs). KIDs are superconducting microresonators, whose inductance changes when incident radiation is absorbed. The change in inductance produces a small shift in the resonant frequency of the microresonator, allowing for the detection of photons. Radiation will be focused onto the absorber portion of the KIDs through back-illumination by microlens arrays. The technology development section in the SMD Astrophysics division supports the development of IR detectors (page 85 of NASA’s SMD 2014 Science Plan), such as KIDs. Mid- and far-IR KID arrays will also benefit the Origins Space Telescope (OST) and the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA). Which both have instruments that operate in the same wavelength ranges as those being developed for the GEP. 
 
 A pathfinder long-duration balloon (GEP-B) will be used to demonstrate performance and raise Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of potential GEP and OST detectors and perform pre-cursor GEP science. It will contain a total of 2,864 KIDs to observe wavelengths of 10-400 microns. 
This wavelength coverage meets the needs of OST and SOFIA. 
For my proposed research I will design and demonstrate functionality of KID technology for 10 - 100 microns. This wavelength range has not been an area of emphasis in KID research and KIDs for detection from 10 – 300 microns have not been implemented yet. I will aim to demonstrate 
GEP proto-type KID arrays for detection of 10 - 400 microns at TRL-5 in the laboratory by 2023, in preparation for the GEP, OST and GEP-B. A previous KID design that has demonstrated detection in the far-IR will be used for wavelengths greater than 100 microns.  
 
I will simulate and model the detectors and work to improve device designs using the high frequency simulating software, ANSYS HFSS. I will also perform dark test and optical tests to characterize the detectors. These tests will be done in our 100 mK cryostat test bed and include measurements of Q-factors, accuracy of the channel frequency targeting, and optical and dark noise-equivalent power (NEP) measurements. The NEP is a metric used to quantify the sensitivity of a detector, where a smaller NEP corresponds to a more sensitive detector. It is equal to the noise spectral density divided by the responsivity of the detector. Optical NEP characterization will be done with a Fourier-transform spectrometer, for determination of spectral response, and with a cryogenic blackbody, which serves as a calibrated optical source. 
 
The proposed research will realize new space technology and extend the wavelength coverage of KIDs to provide scientific data to better understand galaxy evolution. 
 
 
Lars Hernquist (PI) Angus Beane (FI) 
Institution:  Harvard College  
19-ASTRO20-0010, The Milky Way in a Bottle: Realizing the promise of Galactic surveys 
 
Current and upcoming surveys of the Milky Way have the promise to revolutionize our understanding of our home galaxy and galaxies in general. However, the same exquisite detail that these surveys reveal make their interpretation incredibly complicated. Little will be learned from the straightforward application of analytic theory -- fully self-consistent models including all the complicated physical processes are necessary to achieve a detailed understanding. We aim to address this problem by performing a series of controlled simulations using state-of-the-art models in the moving-mesh code AREPO of isolated galaxies that are constructed to match key structural properties of the Milky Way. These simulations will include the bevy of physical processes believed to shape the current population of galaxies: gravity, hydrodynamics, cooling and heating, magnetic fields, feedback from supernovae and young stars, radiation fields, and dust. The models we will use include the necessary physics for the cold, dense phase of the interstellar medium -- resolved at the resolution of our simulations. We will incorporate all the components of the cosmological context that have been identified as important contributors to the current state of the disk: large-mass satellites such as Sagittarius and the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, low-mass satellites and subhalos, the circumgalactic medium, and gas accretion from the intergalactic medium. By performing simulations of isolated galaxies, we will have total control over the system, allowing us to perform laboratory experiments on both properties of the disk and properties of the cosmological context. In addition, simulations of isolated galaxies are more efficient than standard techniques in the field, alowing us to reach unprecedented resolutions. We plan to augment this by incorporating test particles into AREPO, which will allow us to sample phase-space at the native resolution of the Milky Way. These advantages will allow us to create fully self-consistent mock catalogs of major surveys (e.g., Gaia, SDSS-V, TESS, and SPHEREx) with unprecedented detail and resolution. Combined with the control we will have over the system, we will be able to make direct comparisons with the observations and make novel inferences about the Milky Way. The simulations, along with the mock catalogs, will be made publicly available as soon as possible. While the catalogs in our proposal are limited to the stellar component, the simulations may also be used in a similar fashion to study the interstellar gas and dust, for which a large swath of high-resolution observations have been made and are being made. Our proposal charts a new path forward for understanding our home galaxy. 
 
 
 
David Hogg (PI) Kate Storey-Fisher (FI) 
Institution:  New York University   
19-ASTRO20-0076, Clustering Analysis Methods for the Next Generation of Large-Scale Structure Surveys 
 
Motivation: The next generation of galaxy surveys will deliver an unprecedented amount of data on the large-scale structure of the universe. In particular, NASA's Euclid and WFIRST missions have the potential to probe cosmological parameters to extreme precision, testing the standard model of cosmology to its limits. Euclid is only two years from launch and will measure an order of magnitude more galaxy redshifts than the current leading survey. However, clustering analyses from large-scale structure are limited by our current tools: most importantly, the formulation of our estimators and the mitigation of systematic effects. We propose to develop new tools to address these limitations. In this proposal, we take a two-pronged approach to improving clustering analysis methods, with particular application to the Euclid survey. 
 
Science approach: 
 
1)	Development and application of a new two-point correlation function (2pcf) estimator: The 2pcf is the most important statistic for cosmological analyses, but current estimators have significant limitations. We will use the new 2pcf estimator developed by the FI and PI to perform an improved cosmological analysis of the Euclid Wide survey. The estimator results in lower bias and lower variance compared to the standard estimator, and requires fewer components, which lowers the number of expensive mock catalogs needed for covariance estimation. Here we propose to develop its application to the analysis of the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation feature, which gives the strongest constraints on cosmic distance scales, including the distance-redshift relation. We will apply the new BAO estimator to the Euclid flagship mock catalogs, and make projections for improved parameter constraints. 
 
2)	A new approach to systematics mitigation: Systematic effects will be a limiting factor in upcoming large-scale surveys. The Euclid survey, which is optimized for statistics, will contend with systematics such as variable bandpasses and galactic extinction. These will imprint noncosmological variations in galaxy density. We propose a new method to correct for systematics which has two components: a) We will construct a suite of advesarially designed mock galaxy catalogs. These will demonstrate the limitations of current methods for systematics mitigation and demonstrate how new cosmological information could be obscured by systematics. b) We will develop a method using Gaussian Processes, a probabilistic machine learning technique, to perform more flexible and robust systematics calibration. We will train the model on the adversarial mocks to optimally mitigate systematics without losing cosmological constraining power. We will apply this new method to the Euclid mock catalogs, and demonstrate how improved systematics mitigation will propagate to more accurate parameter constraints from clustering analyses. 
 
Significance to NASA goals: The proposed research is directly relevant to NASA's scientific goals within the Physics of the Cosmos program. We aim to leverage the investment already made in upcoming large-scale structure surveys, most immediately Euclid and later WFIRST, to learn in exquisite detail the cosmological model that governs our universe. We will develop tools to address the limiting factors in galaxy clustering analysis — bias and variance from both statistics estimation and systematics mitigation — which will provide significantly increased constraining power with only marginally more investment. Additionally, this work is related to NASA's program of Research Analysis and Technology development. We will produce methods based on modern data science techniques that will set new standards for large-scale structure analysis. All code and data products will be publicly available for the use of the astronomy community. With our focus on new analysis tools for cosmology, we will extend the scientific impact of NASA's upcoming large-scale structure surveys." 
 
Eliza Kempton (PI) Benjamin Hord (FI) 
Institution:  University of Maryland, College Park  
19-ASTRO20-0124, The Hunt for Migrating Hot Jupiters to Constrain Formation 
 
Ever since the Nobel Prize-winning discovery of the first exoplanet around a main sequence star in 1995, hot Jupiters (HJs) have challenged our views on planet formation. These planets orbit shockingly close to their host stars with periods of < 10 days. According to traditional ideas about planetary formation, planets of this type should not be able to form at such close distances to stars. Two possible theories to explain this involve the inward migration one or multiple planets: either the HJ itself migrated to its current position from gravitational interactions with other planets or stars or the entire protoplanetary disk migrated inward as a whole during the system’s formation. There is currently no consensus as to which of these HJ formation processes dominates since no uniform data set of every HJ has previously existed with enough precision to measure the observables associated with each mechanism. 
 
This study aims to determine and place constraints on these formation mechanisms in a nearlyall-sky data set of HJs and conduct a population analysis of the formation of HJs as an ensemble for the first time. By searching for change in HJ orbital period in both new and archival data spanning over a decade, it is possible to directly observe this migration in certain HJ systems and place dynamical constraints on those systems in which it is not observed. Furthermore, the analysis pipeline will also search the time-series data for periodic signals that could be indicative of nearby, small planetary companions to the HJs – a strong marker of the disk migration mechanism – which would be critical in constraining the dynamical evolution of the system. A search for both direct HJ orbital migration and nearby companion planets on a large-scale data set will enable the estimation of occurrence rates for each mechanism for the first time and will go far in furthering our understanding of how these surprising systems form. This will be a significant step in updating current theories on the interdisciplinary fields of exoplanets and planetary formation, areas that NASA has noted as a goal in its 2014 NASA Science Plan and will also be the key to answering a question that has vexed astronomers for as long as the field of exoplanets has existed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allison Kirkpatrick (PI) Cassandra Hatcher (FI) 
Institution:  University of Kansas Center for Research  
19-ASTRO20-0078, How Do Undetected AGN Affect Galaxy Evolution? 
 
Main Objective: We will determine if the host galaxies of X-ray undetected active galactic nuclei (AGN) are significantly different from X-ray bright AGN at the peak epoch of cosmic assembly, z=1-3. We will determine if an obscured, X-ray undetected phase of AGN growth precedes the X-ray detected phase. 
 
Significance: X-ray bright AGN are predicted to follow an extended stage of obscured black hole growth, after which they produce most of their feedback. However, robustly identifying obscured AGN in the distant Universe is difficult, due to telescope detection limits and resolution. We are building on previous work by the PI to sensitively identify AGN candidates in the IR. We will measure the physical properties of the IR AGN candidates using X-ray stacking. We will have an unprecedented sample of thousands of X-ray undetected AGN for which we can measure host galaxy properties, allowing us to unambiguously determine if these galaxies are in a different evolutionary phase (characterized by star formation rate and host galaxy size) than X-ray bright 
AGN. 
 
Methods: We examine galaxies M* > 10^9.5Msun for the presence of AGN at redshifts z = 0.5 - 3 in the COSMOS, EGS, and GOODS-S fields. We select AGN in the infrared by probing the full shape of the IR spectral energy distribution by combining Herschel and Spitzer colors, 250/24um and 8/3.6um. 250/24 traces the ratio of the far-IR to mid-IR emission; lower ratios correlate with AGN heating. 8/3.6 traces the stellar bump; in this regime AGN radiation will outshine the stellar bump. These IR colors allow us to select AGN within strongly star forming host galaxies. Of galaxies investigated so far (COSMOS field), 50% reveal evidence of dust heating surrounding super-massive black holes, but lack an X-ray detection. These galaxies were X-ray stacked, and it revealed hundreds of galaxies as potential X-ray undetected AGN hosts, a sample size that is unprecedented at this epoch. We will stack the EGS and GOODS-S fields as well. We will measure host galaxy size, to look for evidence of increased compactness with increasing X-ray luminosity. We will measure SFR from the infrared data, to see if SFR is decreasing even in X-ray undetected AGN. 
 
Perceived Impact: Our preliminary work demonstrates that there is a higher population of obscured AGN than previously thought. This proposed study will determine whether these obscured AGN are in a different evolutionary stage than star forming galaxies and X-ray bright AGN. This should provide strong constraints for galaxy evolution models. Furthermore, this study incorporates some of the ERS data from the James Webb Space Telescope. We will provide the first measurements of IR AGN with JWST and compare with our previous Spitzer and Chandra measurements of the AGN energetics. 
 
Relevance to ADAP Solicitation:  This project is well aligned with the goals of the FINESST program in that it transcends traditional wavelength regimes and uses existing archival data to address several open questions regarding obscured AGN and the co-evolution of SMBHs and their host galaxies. Our science objectives are key components of the galaxy formation and evolution objectives outlined in NASA's Strategic Plan and Astrophysics Subcommittee Roadmap." 
 
 
Anne Lohfink (PI) Sulov Chalise (FI) 
Institution:  Montana State University, Bozeman  
19-ASTRO20-0079, Studying the Tori of Polar-Scattered Seyfert 1 galaxies in the X-ray and Infrared 
 
The unification model of active galactic nuclei requires the presence of a dusty circum-nuclear structure, commonly referred to as the 'torus'. The orientation of this torus with respect to the line of sight determines if the region between the accretion disk and the torus, where the optical broad lines are produced, is obscured. This torus was believed to be a smooth toroidal structure. However, recent developments have suggested the idea of a non-uniform ""clumpy"" torus in order to explain the observations, inconsistent with a smooth torus. Despite its important role in black hole accretion and AGN 'feedback', the torus is not well-understood or studied. Even though the number of torus studies have increased in recent years, they have been targeting the highly-obscured Seyfert 2 tori. A similar study of the less-obscured Seyfert 1 tori is needed to complete the picture. Polar-scattered Seyfert 1 galaxies are ideal sources for this as the line of sight passes through the edge of their torus causing minimal obscuration but allowing a study of the torus properties. Thus, we propose to study the torus structure of all twelve, known polarscattered Seyferts using archival X-ray and IR data. The multi-epoch and multi-wavelength archival data will be analyzed using a self-consistent physical torus model spanning from the IR to the X-rays, for the first time. We aim to constrain the physical torus parameters of the whole sample and explore the relationship among the parameters. We will also compare our torus findings to what we know from literature for Seyfert 2s. 
 
 
Caroline Morley (PI) Melanie Rowland (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Texas, Austin  
19-ASTRO20-0122, Retrieving the Properties of Cloudy Exoplanets and Brown Dwarfs 
 
Retrieving the Properties of Cloudy Exoplanets and Brown Dwarfs Atmospheric retrieval is the only method through which properties of exoplanet atmospheres can be determined since in situ measurements are impossible at astronomical distances. But to date, retrieval frameworks with clouds have not been robustly verified for accuracy despite the fact that clouds are nearly ubiquitous in planetary atmospheres. Here, we propose to understand planet properties based on noisy, imperfect spectra both now with giant planets and in the future with small planets through improved atmospheric modeling and retrievals. To accomplish this goal, we plan to develop and vet a retrieval framework that includes clouds and apply this framework in three contexts: to benchmark brown dwarfs about which we know key properties, to brown dwarfs in moving groups to investigate low surface gravity, and to planets that have direct imaging data from Gemini Planet Imager (GPI) and Spectro-Polarimetric High-contrast Exoplanet REsearch instrument (SPHERE).  These techniques will be critical for studying exoplanets with NASA missions in the future, including the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), the Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST), and the proposed Habitable Exoplanet Observatory (HabEx) and Large Ultraviolet Optical Infrared Surveyor (LUVOIR) missions. This research is of particular importance to both the Astrophysics and Planetary Science divisions. 
 
 
Nikhil Padmanabhan (PI) Jovana Zagorac (FI) 
Institution:  Yale University  
19-ASTRO20-0031, A Light in the Dark: UltraLight Dark Matter in Simulation and Observation 
 
This proposal describes a two-year plan for testing the feasibility of UltraLight Dark Matter (ULDM) through high-resolution simulations of cosmic structure. ULDM is a well-motivated low-mass axion which acts like Cold Dark Matter (CDM) on large scales, but naturally smoothes inner (~1 kpc) regions of the halo, thus evading the cusp-core problem. When unperturbed, the lowest energy solution of the ULDM system is a spherical “soliton” structure with a known mass density profile. A ULDM dark matter halo is formed through collisions of these solitons and has two characteristic parts: a central soliton core, and an NFW-skirt surrounding it. 
 
Despite the popularity of the candidate, resolving its wavelength is cumbersome for extant solvers. We introduce ChapelUltra, a parallel, portable, and efficient ULDM solver, with isolated boundary conditions and a new Fast Fourier Transform routine which easily outperforms the competition. This allows us to run larger boxes at higher resolution, thus bringing an unprecedented level of detail to numerical ULDM simulations. This is crucial to keep up with the quality of observational data expected from upcoming NASA key missions, including Euclid, JWST, and WFIRST.  
 
The development of ChapelUltra is complete, allowing us to focus on specific astrophysical probes of ULDM, of which we propose four. First, we want to build an astrophysically realistic halo and reproduce the scaling relations from the literature which predict the mass of the central core as a function of the halo’s mass and initial energy. Then, we will extend this relation to include angular momentum in the halo. We also intend to build a library of binary soliton collisions with different orbital parameters. This will provide better intuition for the physics of soliton collisions and resulting haloes; as an example, halo angular momentum can result from collisions with a non-zero impact parameter. This publication will be available in mid-2020. 
 
Next, we set our sights on the low-redshift universe, where the resolution of extant observational data is the highest (and will be pushed even further with Euclid and WFIRST), and therefore best able to resolve deviations from CDM. Our second project will involve the modeling of Milky Way stellar streams: thin structures formed from the tidal disruption of progenitor globular clusters (GCs). ULDM is more turbulent than CDM due to its quantum nature, and it has been shown that this can result in observable stream thickening. We will use the “streakline” method of modeling streams and use an orbital integrator the FI is building to integrate the stream forward. We will compare with observational data on the streams’ thicknesses from Gaia to set exclusions on our particle’s mass. We intend to publish our streams results in early 2021.  
 
Next, we intend to begin simulating expanding spacetime by adding a Hubble drag term to our 
ChapelUltra solver. We will use this to explore nonlinear structure formation and model the Lyman-alpha forest flux at low redshifts. This will allow us to put more precise constraints on ULDM masses from comparing our Lyman-alpha measurements to data. Such a constraint is independent of one derived from stream modeling, thus adding to the robustness of our findings. We intend to publish Lyman-alpha results in late 2021. 
 
Finally, we will explore the Universe at the end of inflation, when it is dominated by the oscillating inflaton condensate. Perturbations in the condensate can grow gravitationally and fragment, which is described by the physical system as ULDM. Such nonlinear dynamics in the very early Universe can affect the form of the inflationary power spectrum, and thus may result in a variety of observable consequences. These include impacts on the observable perturbation spectrum, which seeds the early structure formation that will be imaged in detail by JWST. We expect the accompanying publication to be available mid-2022. 
 
 
Vasileios Paschalidis (PI) Gabriele Bozzola (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Arizona  
19-ASTRO20-0058, General relativistic studies of accreting binary black holes as multimessenger sources 
 
The goal of this proposal is to employ dynamical-spacetime general-relativistic 
magnetohydrodynamic simulations to build robust models of accreting binary black holes (BBHs) as multimessenger sources. This will be instrumental in interpreting current and future electromagnetic (EM) and gravitational-wave (GW) observations. Combining the complementary information contained in coincident GW and EM signals, multimessenger astronomy enables leaps in the astrophysical research. BBHs accreting hot, magnetized plasma are promising multimessenger sources and they affect not only astrophysics but also fundamental physics and cosmology. Over 150 candidate supermassive BBHs (SMBBHs) have been identified by EM surveys, and every LIGO BBH detection has been followed up by massive campaigns searching for EM counterparts. In spite of their astrophysical relevance, studies from first principles of accretion onto BBHs are still in their infancy. As a result, our theoretical understanding is not advanced enough to satisfactorily interpret observational data. Our project aims to progress the state-of-the-art of this field. 
 
We will investigate the generation of high-energy photons and explore the astrophysical environments around stellar-mass BBHs (smBBHs). There exists evidence that smBBHs merging in the presence of gas may be accompanied by EM signals. We will simulate BBHs inspirals in massive accretion disks with varying densities to understand the effects on EM and GW signals. The ongoing LIGO-Virgo observing run has already detected candidate GWs from tens of smBBHs, and, with the models we will build, we will use the absence of associated EM counterparts to constrain the environment. This will inform smBBH formation and evolution theories. Considering accretion onto BBHs with rotating components, we will investigate the impact of spin on the GWs and outflows, which has never been explored with GR simulations. Finally, we will analyze the effect of the ambient gas on the effective-spin of BBHs as inferred from the GWs. This will provide a novel mechanism for explaining the unsolved problem of the zero effective-spin in LIGO-Virgo BBHs detections. 
 
The lack of first-principle models for accreting BBHs has profound implications for SMBBHs. In addition to the more than 150 already known, the number of candidate SMBBHs will increase rapidly with future large-sky surveys. Yet, due to the strong theoretical uncertainties, conclusive identification and characterization of these systems are impossible. Since many of the existing candidates are in the GW-driven inspiral regime, they are ideal multimessenger sources. We will simulate SMBBHs surrounded by an accretion disk including radiation transport. With these, we will predict both the GW signatures, and the light-curves and spectra through inspiral, merger,  and post-merger. This will help the identification of candidate SMBBHs by  distinguishing them from competing models. Moreover, in the LISA era, correct identification of SMBBHs will be necessary to perform high-precision cosmological measurements. Our work will also provide a way to build phenomenological models for connecting multimessenger information with the properties of the BHs and the surrounding matter. Measuring the system parameters, such as the total mass and the mass ratio, will impact studies on how SMBHs grow, evolve and merge in the Universe. 
 
With this research, we will place constraints on the environment of smBBHs, and we will understand the role of the BH spins in inspiral dynamics and the GW and EM signals. We will make realistic predictions of the GW and EM emission of coalescing and merging SMBBHs, models that can be used to interpret present and future observations. The proposal aligns perfectly with the goals of the Physics of the Cosmos Program and will benefit numerous NASA missions. 
 
 
Mateusz Ruszkowski (PI) Francisco Holguin (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Michigan, Ann Arbor  
19-ASTRO20-0055, Impact of Cosmic Rays on Observational Signatures of the Circumgalactic Medium 
 
Observations of the universe show snapshots of many states of galaxy evolution, but information obtained is limited, unable to differentiate between many possible underlying processes within a galaxy. As noted by the “Cosmic Origins” goal of the Science Mission Directorate, exactly which processes drive galaxy formation and evolution, ultimately forming the universe seen today, remains an important and challenging question. Cosmic rays (CRs), high-energy particles accelerated in supernovae, can play a role in the evolution of galaxies through efficient acceleration of galactic winds and heating the interstellar medium. Simulations of the interactions between gas, stars, and CRs in a galaxy help probe these phenomena in a way that is otherwise difficult. However, the enormous range in scales and poorly understood physics, present a particularly challenging computational problem.  
 
Recent improvements in computational power and algorithm efficiencies have made it possible to move beyond purely hydrodynamic simulations of the galactic environment, to magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations, which include magnetic fields and can include CRs. Simulations have shown that CRs in particular can greatly affect the both the dynamical and thermal states of gas in a galaxy. However, the complete details of CR transport through the circumgalactic (CGM) medium remain uncertain. The exact properties of simulated galactic models depend sensitively on how CR transport is modeled. Observational signatures of the CGM medium, such as metal emission/absorption lines, can help distinguish these models and illuminate the processes that play a key role in shaping a galaxy. The central objective of our research is to significantly increase the realism of these simulations and predictions inferred from them. We will conduct three-dimensional coupled CR-MHD simulations of an isolated section of a galactic disk and post-process predicted metal line signatures with the code Cloudy. We will compare predictions from simulations with different feedback and how they depend on simulated galaxy properties and the assumptions made in post-processing.  
 
This research is highly relevant to NASA interests. As a result of this research, we will have a greater insight into observed galactic signals, many of which are recorded by NASA instruments and funded research, such as the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph on the Hubble Space Telescope that has surveyed many galaxies. Additionally, other researchers will also be able to use the prediction tools we have developed for their own unique simulations, allowing for a deeper investigation into observations. Overall, we will be able to identify which set of models of feedback, including CRs, match these observations and are likely to play a role in the evolution of galaxies. 
 
 
Evgenya Shkolnik (PI) Tyler Richey-Yowell (FI) 
Institution:  Arizona State University  
19-ASTRO20-0081, The Ultraviolet Imperative for Assessing the Habitability of Planets 
 
Efforts to discover and characterize habitable zone planets have primarily focused on Sun-like stars and M dwarfs. Yet the intermediate K stars provide an appealing compromise between these two extremes that has been relatively unexplored. Compared to solar-type stars, K stars are more abundant, maintain longer main-sequence lifetimes, and their planets are more suitable to observations based on the mass/radius ratios of the planet to star. While M stars offer better solutions in these regards, they have other potentially life-destroying disadvantages compared to K dwarfs. For example, super-flares with ultraviolet (UV) energies over 100 times more powerful than anything produced by our Sun have been seen on Proxima Centauri and on other M stars. These studies suggest that perhaps these highly-energetic flares are not uncommon and may occur on the order of once per day. 
 
 The UV radiation incident on a planet (bothdissociating both the most important molecules for the development of life and signatures that would be indicative of life, with the potential for complete erosion of the atmosphere. In Richey-Yowell et al. (2019), we measured K star nearUV (NUV) and far-UV (FUV) stellar activity photometrically with GALEX and determined that 
K stars may show a greater potential for habitability due to their lower (up to 1000 times less) UV flux incident on HZ planets. Unfortunately, the GALEX bandpass leaves out some of the most important emission features (e.g. Lyα, MgII) and does not provide information about emission lines at different formation temperatures. To fully characterize K star UV evolution, UV spectroscopy is essential. 
 
 We propose to utilize a sample of 23 K stars at  5 Gyr that will be observed in the NUV and 
FUV with the Hubble Space Telescope in the next two years (GO 15955, PI: Richey-Yowell). 
These measurements will allow us to study the UV, flare, and variability evolution of K stars. 
The implications of this work will be a critical component in determining the potential habitability of planets orbiting K stars by characterizing the UV spectral range as a function of age. Additionally, we aim to get simultaneous optical spectra and photometry from ground-based observatories through both collaborations and our own efforts to make correlations between these two wavelength regimes. UV-optical relationships will be the only empirical means by which we can estimate the UV flux of exoplanet host stars that were not observed prior to the discontinuation of HST’s UV capabilities. 
 
 This project directly supports NASA’s exoplanet exploration goals. We will address the evolution of space weather around host stars and determine implications for detection of habitable zone planets by determining the UV evolution of K dwarfs, which will refine planetary atmospheric models that require realistic NUV and FUV input values to determine the probability of planet habitability. These values may be used to boost efforts for prioritizing JWST targets for planetary characterization and will inform our interpretation of transmission and emission planetary spectra by characterizing the UV environment surrounding these planets. 
 
 
Juri Toomre (PI) Connor Bice (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-ASTRO20-0067, Exploring Convective Dynamos and Intense Magnetism in M-Dwarf Stars 
 
M-type stars are quickly stepping into the forefront as some of the best candidates in searches for habitable Earth-like exoplanets, and yet many M-dwarfs exhibit extraordinary magnetic flaring events which would bombard otherwise habitable planets with ionizing radiation. Fully expressing the requirements for habitability relies on having a well grounded understanding of these stars’ magnetism. In recent years, observers have found that the fraction of M-stars demonstrating significant magnetic activity transitions sharply from roughly 10% for mainsequence stars more massive than 0.35 M_sun to nearly 90% for stars less massive than 0.35 M_sun. Suggestively, it is also below 0.35 M_sun at which main-sequence stars become fully convective (FC), and may no longer contain a shear layer known as the tachocline. This shear layer is traditionally considered to play a fundamental role in organizing and amplifying the Sun’s magnetic fields, and numerical models of full sphere convection have revealed that such a geometry can also have a substantial impact on dynamo processes.  
 
We seek answers to two main scientific questions about the M-dwarfs. First, how are these small, dim stars able to generate such powerful magnetic fields? Second, what makes the magnetic lifetimes of the less massive M-dwarfs so much longer than those of their more massive counterparts? Using the spherical 3D anelastic MHD simulation code Rayleigh, we propose to model the convective dynamos operated in the interiors of M-dwarf stars across the transition from envelope to full-sphere convection. We will analyze the strengths and configurations of the magnetic fields produced at a variety of rotation rates, as well as the various transport and inductive processes whose balances sustain the dynamo. A subset of these experiments has already been conducted, with early results indicating that the tachocline helps fast-rotating, highmass M-dwarfs to organize their external magnetic fields onto larger spatial scales than the fields of stars with equivalent convection zones but no shear layer. This suggests a shortening of their lifetime through enhanced spindown, but the more telling comparisons to equivalent models of FC stars are yet to be made. By exploring the differences and similarities of numerically comparable models at 0.4, 0.3, and 0.1 M_sun, we will be able to piece together answers to both of the questions posed. 
 
 
Joel Ullom (PI) Samantha Walker (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-ASTRO20-0075, New Millimeter-Wave Detectors to Map Cosmic Star Formation History 
 
(Sub)millimeter ((sub)mm) observations of dusty star-forming galaxies (DSFGs) enable studies of galaxies that have traditionally been overlooked by ultraviolet and optical surveys due to strong extinction of this starlight and its re-radiation at longer wavelengths. For example, without a nearly complete sample of DSFGs, it remains an open question how important dust-obscured star formation was to the cosmic star formation history in the early Universe. We propose to develop and characterize a novel superconducting detector technology called microwave kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs) for TolTEC and beyond in three crucial ways. TolTEC is a MKID imaging polarimeter with three arrays that will observe at 1.1 mm, 1.4 mm, and 2.0 mm from the Large Millimeter Telescope in the near future. We will investigate problematic excess low frequency 1/f noise in titanium nitride MKIDs, the type used by TolTEC and a likely candidate for future space-based far-infrared/(sub)mm instrumentation, through a systematic study of critical design parameters and operational conditions. We will improve MKID coupling by designing and characterizing a new MKID pixel with a planar orthomode transducer and including additional capabilities like multiple passband definition. We will also characterize the on-sky performance of all three TolTEC arrays compared to lab measurements. With its passbands and the unprecedented sensitivity afforded by MKIDs, TolTEC will transform our understanding of galaxy formation in the early Universe, in particular the cosmic star formation history, by collecting a near complete sample of DSFGs along with redshift information. Furthermore, MKIDs hold much promise as the detector technology of choice in possible NASA missions, such as the Origins Space Telescope, after further development. This work will address some of the last obstacles to MKIDs achieving this scientific potential. 
 
 
John Wise (PI) Danielle Skinner (FI) 
Institution:  Georgia Tech Research Corporation  
19-ASTRO20-0042, Nucleosynthesis from Neutron Star Mergers in the Early Universe 
 
The exact evolution of elements in the universe, from primordial hydrogen and helium to heavier elements like gold and platinum, is still under scrutiny. The production of heavier elements and sources of these production sites needs to be determined to paint a more complete picture of the early universe. A possible source of these heavy elements is via the r-process, the rapid bombardment of neutrons onto elements, by merging neutron stars. These elements then find themselves caught in the next generation of stars, leaving behind a memory of what came before. In this work, we aim to answer the question of how the first generation of stars chemically imprints onto descendant stellar generations by simulating, for the first time, neutron star mergers (NSM) in a cosmological context. This proposal lays out three aims to accomplish: 
 
1.	Correlate NSM parameters with r-process abundances. We will vary the time between supernova explosions of the first stars and the merger event, the merger explosion energy, and the r-process ejecta mass of the NSM in a series of simulations to understand how these parameters affect resulting r-process abundances.  
 
2.	Determine if the next generation of star formation can be seeded by a NSM scenario. We will follow the evolution of an ultra-faint dwarf galaxy (UFD) until metal-enriched star formation takes place to determine how the next generation of stars is affected by previous events. 
 
3.	Observe how different chemical enrichment processes will affect metal abundances. We will model different enrichment processes, specifically a core-collapse supernova and jet-driven supernova, to determine how the metal abundances change. We will use the dwarf galaxy Reticulum 2 (Ret 2) as a case study to compare with since stars within Reticulum 2 have been found to have an abundance of r-process elements. 
 
To complete this work, we will be using the simulation code Enzo. This is an open-source cosmology simulation tool that uses adaptive mesh refinement and is highly parallelizable. Enzo incorporates a variety of processes that are important for star formation and chemical enrichment, including metal and dust cooling, feedback, and radiative transport. We will use Enzo to run several zoom-in simulations of a single UFD galaxy. This will provide us with very high-resolution simulations, giving us the data we will need to accurately study the evolution within the UFD galaxy. 
 
Our proposed work will answer questions about the transition from the first generation of metalfree stars to the second generation of metal-enriched stars, and how r-process abundances are affected by NSM and other chemical enrichment processes. With the James Webb Space Telescope up and coming, this series of simulations will provide information about the early universe, and could help guide Webb in its lifetime. Webb will be able to see back to a much younger universe and may be able to probe some of these events. Any information we can gather before then will prepare us for the large amounts of data that is expected by Webb. This is also relevant to the current Fermi gamma-ray space telescope mission, as we know that gamma-rays are produced in these highly energetic NSM events. This work will provide insight into these early universe events and will lay the groundwork for future simulations of NSM. 
