Vassilis Angelopoulos (PI) Ethan Tsai (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Los Angeles  
19-HELIO20-0017, Miniaturized Search Coil Magnetometer for CubeSat-based Space Weather Investigations 
 
Radiation belt particle dynamics have been long thought to be largely influenced by the interaction of particles with plasma waves. The observatories that measure such interactions are typically equatorial, high altitude satellites unable to directly observe the particle loss cone and decipher the pitch-angle scattering processes causing the radiation belts to wax and wane. Conversely, polar-orbiting low-altitude satellites, which can easily measure the loss-cone, in the past were rarely equipped with pitch-angle resolving energetic particle detectors and wave detectors. As a result, radiation belt theory and associated models of pitch-angle scattering lack direct observational evidence. Future CubeSats, like ELFIN, can fill this important observational gap, if miniaturized wave detectors compatible with CubeSats can become available. A team comprised of myself, my advisor, and several experienced scientists at UCLA, propose to design, develop, and test to TRL5 a triaxial Search Coil Magnetometer (SCM) capable of measuring whistler mode chorus waves in a 1U volume. Such waves are a critical component of radiation belt dynamics and are thought to propagate to low altitudes but have never been studied there. This project is well aligned with NASA Heliophysics SMD goals as defined in the 2014 Heliophysics Science and Technology Roadmap and directly addresses NASA’s technology needs, falling under section TX08.3.1 in the 2020 NASA Technology Taxonomy update. This investigation will apply the lessons learned, both personally and technically, from my successful 
management of the NASA ELFIN CubeSats missions, where I was involved with the 
development, production, flight qualification, calibration, and flight of its now-TRL-9 Energetic 
Particle Detector (EPD) suite. With my collaborators, I will rely on Anton Artemyev and Michael Hartinger’s guidance on instrument simulation and magnetometer design work, respectively, based on their experience in those areas, as well as guidance from my advisor, Vassilis Angelopoulos, based on his experience with the ongoing and successful NASA THEMIS mission. Xiao-Jia Zhangs expertise in chorus waves will be helpful in outlining requirements and ensuring the Search Coil remains relevant to the state-of-the-art knowledge on whistler waves. This proposal is to fund the development efforts to achieve this project’s success; remaining expenses, including equipment costs, will be covered by internal UCLA support. Successful completion of this project has far reaching implications. The synergistic capabilities of an instrument suite comprised of ELFIN’s energetic particle detector and the proposed SCM would be unprecedented, addressing science questions that have been open for decades. Most importantly, it will help address the role of low altitude waves in electron acceleration and scattering. This area has received very little attention in the past because measurements were scarce, but recent serendipitous observations suggest that it is an important contributor to wave-particle interactions.  Additionally, the ability to make low-cost, highperformance, miniaturized search coils in the United States aligns directly with GSFC’s first Strategic Goal: to ‘expand knowledge, national capability, and opportunities for collaboration on a variety of flight missions.’ For two decades, the United States has relied on international cooperation to fly SCMs on missions the likes of THEMIS, RBSP, MMS, and Parker Solar Probe. One of the few SCMs built in the US was made at UCLA for the FAST mission (launched 1997), the design of which this project will draw upon. This effort will kickstart a new line of heritage Search Coils that can serve the NASA community in the future, expanding knowledge, expanding American capabilities in this area, and furthering collaboration across the US space physics community. 
 
 
 
Steven Cranmer (PI) Samuel Van Kooten (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-HELIO20-0001, Preparing for DKIST: Connecting the High-Resolution Sun to the Turbulent Corona 
 
The outer atmosphere (or corona) of the Sun is a highly chaotic and turbulent environment threaded by a strong and similarly fragmented magnetic field. However, this atmosphere is very faint and difficult to observe in detail; our clearest and highest-resolution images of the Sun are of the surface layer, the photosphere. Photospheric observations will become even higherresolution when the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) begins operations next year. The objective of this proposal is to develop techniques to leverage these high-resolution DKIST observations to better understand the nature of the turbulent corona and how this turbulence is driven by the solar surface. 
  
 Specifically, this proposal focuses on the motions of bright points on the solar photosphere, which are believed to excite magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) waves in flux tubes which propagate to the corona and turbulently dissipate, depositing heat. These motions have historically been measured through centroid tracking of bright points seen as unresolved blobs. The upcoming DKIST telescope promises to resolve these bright points; however, centroid tracking applied to high-resolution, high-cadence observations is expected to produce significant "jitter" signals on top of true bulk motion, due to both algorithmic limitations and real changes to the shape and size of the bright point. Despite being a noise source for centroid tracking, these size and shape changes are expected to be physically significant as drivers of higher-order flux-tube waves. 
  
 I propose to develop an algorithm to produce reliable velocity maps within resolved bright points to replace the velocity sequences of centroid tracking, and to feed these velocity fields into MHD simulations to determine the statistical properties of the flux tube waves generated by my more-completely measured bright-point motions. This will quantify the significance of the contribution to coronal heating of these higher-order MHD waves relative to the simpler, kinkmode waves generated by pure centroid motion. This work will also produce and verify tools and procedures with simulated data that can later produce higher-order wave diagnostics from DKIST observations. 
  
 By better understanding how bright points contribute to coronal heating, this project will improve understanding of and enable better modeling of the everyday activity of the Sun. This aligns with NASA SMD's interest in understanding processes at play on the Sun as well as on other stars. 
 
 
 
Steven Cranmer (PI) Momchil Molnar (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-HELIO20-0011, Exploring High-Frequency Waves in the Solar Atmosphere from the Photosphere to the Corona 
 
A century of detailed study of the outer atmosphere of the Sun has not revealed the heating mechanism causing its temperature to rise outward or how the continuous plasma outflow known as the solar wind is accelerated. This is a fundamental scientific question as the corona and the solar wind have an increasing impact on our technologically reliant civilization via geomagnetic interference from solar-generated storms. 
  
 The relatively cool chromosphere underlying the corona has a heating conundrum of its own -- the heating flux required to maintain the chromosphere is an order of magnitude higher compared to the corona. Therefore, the chromosphere may be an essential stepping stone in understanding the overlying coronal physics. There are three major proposals for the heating mechanism of the chromosphere: small scale magnetic reconnection, resistive dissipation of current sheets, and dissipation of (magneto-) acoustic waves. Theoretically, any of those mechanisms could provide the required amount of heating to the chromosphere but their unique observational signatures are elusive. Ubiquitous waves are observed in the corona (Tomczyk & McIntosh 2009) with properties similar to those permeating the chromosphere. Therefore, understanding the wave propagation in the chromosphere is crucial for constraining the wave flux entering the corona and contributing to its heating. 
  
 The acoustic wave heating of the chromosphere relies on acoustic waves generated at the base of the photosphere which dissipate in the solar atmosphere as they propagate upward. Previous work based on upper photospheric diagnostics has shown inconclusive results for the acoustic wave flux in the frequency range 5--20 mHz in the upper photosphere. However, there has not been a dedicated study to constrain the wave flux in the chromosphere with modern high resolution observations. 
  
 We propose to constrain the chromospheric heating contribution from waves in a novel spatiotemporal domain (with spatial resolution down to .2 arcsec and frequencies up to 60 mHz) using diagnostics formed in the chromosphere, which has not been done before. 
  
 NASA’s assets - primarily the Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) and the Hi-C 2.1 rocket experiment - are well suited for studying high-frequency waves in the chromosphere and in the corona. We will use archival IRIS observations to study the propagation properties of high frequency waves in the upper chromosphere and transition region as UV observations are required to probe this region of the solar atmosphere. The FI will utilize RADYN modeling to interpret the results from the observational study. The results from this study will serve as a basis for the FI to interpret a unique chromospheric dataset that the FI obtained at the DST in parallel with the Hi-C rocket flight. The dataset consists of cotemporal chromospheric 2D spectral scans complimentary to the coronal Hi-C data which probe the chromospheric-coronal interface at unprecedented resolution. The last step of the proposed project will entail synthesizing observables from MHD cubes with the RH code (that the FI has experience with) to constrain the wave energy fluxes based on those simulations containing more realistic physics. 
  
 This project will address the question from the NAS Decadal Survey on Heliophysics and Solar Physics SHP-2:’Determine how the Sun’s magnetism creates its hot, dynamic atmosphere?’ by constraining one of the proposed mechanisms for maintaining the quiet chromosphere.This question is a priority of NASA's Strategic Goals and Objectives as stated in this solicitation and ties directly with the overarching questions in the NASA's Strategic Plan Section 4.1. 
Furthermore, this research will have implications beyond the scope of the Heliophysics realm as it is a benchmark of our understanding of the heating mechanism of chromospheres of other stars which is crucial for assessing the habitability of the exoplanets orbiting around them. 
 
 
 
Brian Fields (PI) Jesse Miller (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign  
19-HELIO20-0031, Simulating Heliosphere Collisions with Nearby Supernova Blast Waves 
 
The outer heliosphere changes over time in response to its local environment. Amazingly, strong evidence now exists for dramatic heliospheric compression in the recent past due to nearby supernova explosions. Live (undecayed) radioisotopes found in ocean sediments, crusts, Antarctic snow, and even Apollo lunar samples were delivered by supernovae 2-3 Myr ago and possibly 7-8 Myr ago. These same explosions must have had powerful effects on the heliosphere at that time. 
  
 The Illinois group has done an initial investigation (the only of its kind!) into this event in the form of idealized axisymmetric 2D hydrodynamic simulations for a single supernova. However, these simulations assumed supernova distances of less than 30 pc away, rather than the 30-150 pc an updated calculation suggests. As such, they did not perform the most physically relevant scenario. Based on their results, a simple scaling law suggests that for a supernova located 50 pc away, the heliopause will be pushed inwards to 11 AU from the Sun, just outside the orbit of Saturn. 
  
 I will expand on these initial simulations by moving the supernova to relevant distances, switching to 3D, examining the weakening of the supernova blast over time, and including effects of solar activity and the solar cycle. Furthermore, these simulations will be used to determine which outer solar system bodies (Kuiper belt, Oort cloud) are directly exposed to the supernova blast and therefore potentially have a perturbed orbit. As a large part of this project involves modeling the 3D structure of solar activity and the solar wind, I will base the models off observations by solar observatories such as STEREO and SDO. To accurately model the 3D structure of the heliosphere, I will also use data from IBEX and the Voyager missions. 
  
 This work will directly answer questions related to NASA's 2014 Science Plan to understand "connections that link the Sun, the Earth, planetary space environments, and the outer reaches of the solar system" by simulating the heliosphere reaction in connection to the Galaxy in ways that have left observable traces on Earth and possibly modified orbits of outer solar system bodies. Modeling and simulating these effects will help us understand more about these extreme events experienced by the heliosphere, planets, and other bodies in our solar system. Simulations of heliosphere-supernova collisions offer a unique opportunity to study and test heliophysics under dramatically different conditions than the present day. 
 
 
 
Gregory Howes (PI) Sarah Horvath (FI) 
Institution:  University of Iowa, Iowa City  
19-HELIO20-0019, Characterizing Velocity-Space Signatures of Turbulent Dissipation in the Inner Heliosphere 
 
Electromagnetic wave and plasma particle interactions are fundamental to the dynamic nature of the heliosphere, yet the mechanisms by which fields and particles exchange net energy in the solar wind remain largely uncharacterized. Turbulent field dissipation can cause net energy transfer to plasma particles, and the various physical mechanisms thought to influence this energy exchange have been shown to create distinct, characteristic signatures in particle velocityspace. These velocity-space signatures can be analyzed using the field-particle correlation technique, which has been successfully used to study both simulated and in situ data, using single point measurements of electromagnetic fields and particle velocity distributions. This project will, for the first time, apply field-particle correlation analysis to electrons within gyrokinetic simulations of the heliosphere. Specifically, it will study energization in plasmas with high magnetic pressure conditions, relevant to the inner heliosphere and solar corona, and in a plasma simulated to match a recent Magnetospheric MultiScale Mission observation. These studies will be used to support and extend recent observational results and to explore the relationship between plasma-beta and turbulent dissipation by electrons. Additionally, these simulations will be used for a novel extension of the field-particle correlations to low time resolution data, which will probe applicability of this technique at various instrumental measurement cadences. Accomplishing these goals will expand existing theory on particle energization in the solar wind, and create context for future application of field-particle correlations to data from NASA spacecraft in the inner heliosphere. 
 
 
 
Allison Jaynes (PI) Riley Troyer (FI) 
Institution:  University of Iowa, Iowa City  
19-HELIO20-0030, Investigating the Role of Pulsating Aurora to M-I Coupling through a Statistical Study of its Drivers and Energies 
 
As one of the most common forms of aurora, pulsating aurora have received comparatively little attention. Recent studies of their extent and energies suggest that they are significantly more important to how the Earth's atmosphere and magnetic field interact than previously realized. Up to this point, most pulsating aurora studies have focused on a handful of events making it challenging to draw overarching conclusions about the phenomena. This proposal outlines a project to perform the first major statistical study on the drivers and energies of pulsating aurora with the goal of better understanding their contribution to magnetic field to atmosphere coupling. We will do this by comparing ground-based observations of pulsating aurora to in situ electromagnetic wave measurements, and to electron energies derived from the PFISR instrument. 
 
 
 
Wen Li (PI) Longzhi Gan (FI) 
Institution:  Boston University  
19-HELIO20-0012, Comprehensive Understanding of Earth's Radiation Belt Electron Acceleration and Precipitation: Nonlinear Interactions Driven by Chorus Waves 
 
1. Science Objectives 
 The overarching goal of the proposed project is to quantify the nonlinear interactions between radiation belt electrons and chorus waves in the Earth's magnetosphere. Chorus waves are known to play an important role in accelerating electrons to become "killer" electrons in the Earth's radiation belts. In particular, there has been growing support demonstrating that nonlinear interactions can be highly efficient in the electron acceleration process. However, the quantitative effects of nonlinear interactions on both acceleration and precipitation of energetic electrons due to realistic chorus waves and their direct comparison to in situ satellite observations are very limited. Therefore, we propose to perform the following science objectives:  
1)	Quantify the nonlinear acceleration effects of chorus waves and compare to the satellite observation;  
2)	Determine conditions leading to efficient nonlinear electron acceleration caused by chorus;   3) Evaluate nonlinear effects of chorus waves on energetic electron precipitation.  
  
2.	Methodology 
 The project will mainly use test particle simulation to evaluate the interactions between electrons and chorus waves. The simulation will be repeated over a broad range of electron pitch angles and energies to evaluate electron motion, including both acceleration and precipitation, under various chorus wave structures and background parameters. The simulation results will also be directly compared to the Van Allen Probes observation of electrons and chorus waves by evaluating the correlation between chorus waves and the evolution of electron distribution.   
  
3.	Perceived Significance and Relevance  
 Resonant interaction with chorus waves is one of the most important mechanisms for the acceleration of high energy electrons in the Earths inner magnetosphere. The scientific outcome of the proposed project will significantly improve our understanding of the effects of nonlinear interactions driven by chorus waves, which is an outstanding open question in radiation belt science. More specifically, the proposed project will (1) Determine the contribution of nonlinear interactions driven by chorus waves to cause high energy electron acceleration; (2) Provide direct observational evidence of nonlinear wave-particle interactions; (3) Quantify the contribution of nonlinear interactions driven by chorus waves to energetic electron precipitation from the magnetosphere into the upper atmosphere; (4) Provide more accurate estimates on acceleration and scattering loss of radiation belt electrons; (5) Provide insights into studies of nonlinear interactions between electrons and other plasma waves. 
  
 This proposed project with the overarching science goal of quantifying the nonlinear effects of chorus waves on Earth's radiation belt electrons is closely relevant to NASA's Strategic Goal 1: 
"Expand human knowledge through new scientific discoveries"; more specifically, Strategic Objective 1.1: "Understand the Sun, Earth, Solar System, and Universe". This project will directly address NASA's heliophysics strategic objective: "Understand the Sun and its interactions with Earth and the solar system, including space weather". Moreover, this project will also achieve at least two overarching science goals in NASA's Heliophysics Division, namely: (1) "Explore the physical processes in the space environment from the Sun to the Earth and throughout the solar system"; (2) "Advance our understanding of the connections that link the Sun, the Earth, planetary space environments, and the outer reaches of our solar system". This project will combine theory, modeling, and data analysis to evaluate the nonlinear effects of chorus waves on Earth's radiation belt electron acceleration and precipitation, and thus perfectly fits into the "Magnetospheres" Division in the Heliophysics Research Program. 
 
 
 
Gang Li (PI) Michael Terres (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Alabama, Huntsville  
19-HELIO20-0036, Investigation of solar wind plasma velocity distribution as a function of heliocentric distance using the Hermite Decomposition 
 
The solar wind is permeated by magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) waves that exchange energy with ions and electrons from astronomical scales to scales on the order of the electron Debye length. The multi-scale nature of the solar wind connects MHD turbulence to particle velocity distribution functions (VDFs). \textbf{We propose a data-driven study to investigate the fundamental connection of MHD turbulence and particle distributions in velocity space.} The connection between waves and particles has been theorized and studied from the early 1940s. Yet, the mechanism that drives heating and dissipation is still an open question in Heliophysics. Previous observations of the solar wind have been limited either by location, being at 1 AU, or spatial/temporal resolution of plasma data. With the launch of the Parker Solar Probe (PSP) in 2018, one can examine the solar wind up to 10 Solar radii. PSP seeks to provide high-resolution data in near Sun orbit, illuminating the primordial phenomena driving the evolution of the solar wind. Using the groundbreaking data from PSP, we will study ion velocity distributions and MHD turbulence. Preliminary work using the high temporal resolution data from the Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission (MMS) has yielded a clear connection between wave activity and variation of particle VDFs. We have successfully implemented the Hermite Decomposition technique, pioneered by Servidio et. al [2017]. 1D and 2D velocity distribution spectrum for selected MMS data periods were obtained and agreed with Servidio's work. 
Applying to PSP data verified that the technique worked for 0.2 AU data as well. 
 Hermite Decomposition of ion velocity distribution data provides a way to easily depict how non-Maxwellian the solar wind is.  Highly deformed distributions would indicate periods of strong particle-wave interaction. Using this method with Parker Solar Probe data, we anticipate a clear correlation between intermittent structures and large deviations of VDFs from Gaussian's. This will help to understand the heating of the solar wind. With its unique trajectory, PSP will allow us to examine how particle velocity distributions evolve with heliocentric distance. In particular, we will examine if the distribution function in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the background magnetic field evolves in a similar fashion. To summarize, our proposal addresses the issues of wave-particle interactions within the solar wind, from 0.04 AU to 1.0 AU. Our study is directly related to NASA's heliophysics strategic objective to 
\textbf{"explore the physical processes in the space environment from the Sun to the Earth and throughout the solar system"}. Not only will our study benefit the turbulence community, but the techniques used can also further impact planetary and magnetospheric sciences as well. 
 
 
 
Michael Liemohn (PI) Brian Swiger (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Michigan, Ann Arbor  
19-HELIO20-0003, A Machine Learning Approach to Understanding and Predicting Medium-Energy Electrons in Earth's Inner Magnetosphere 
 
We plan to investigate the behavior of medium-energy (1-100 kilo-electron volt) electrons in the inner magnetosphere (2-12 Earth radii) using a statistical approach combined with numerical modeling. Electrons of medium energy transport to the inner magnetosphere from the plasma sheet, where they form part of the ring current and are accelerated to radiation belt energies. However, we lack understanding of the particle distribution in the plasma sheet, and its dependence on solar wind driving. Understanding both their source distribution in the near-Earth magnetotail plasma sheet and their evolution after transport to within geosynchronous orbit contributes toward a more complete understanding of the dynamics of the inner magnetosphere. Additionally, medium energy electrons directly damage spacecraft through surface charging, accelerate to relativistic energy whence they are more hazardous, and are a critical concern for spacecraft operations. We will use data from spacecraft orbiting through the plasma sheet and from spacecraft embedded in the solar wind at L1, combined with machine learning (ML) techniques, to develop a statistical model between upstream solar wind variations and differential electron flux in the near-Earth plasma sheet. The ML model will update boundary conditions for an existing inner magnetosphere model. We will compare the ML-physics coupled model with that of its current version to assess advantages and disadvantages of using ML combined with first-principles based modeling. We intend to use the updated model to investigate the transport and acceleration of medium-energy electrons from the plasma sheet to the inner magnetosphere. The study will lead to a more complete understanding of inner magnetosphere dynamics. 
  
 This proposal aims to understand and predict the response of Earth's magnetopshere to variations in the solar wind. It's goals trace directly to the 2013 Heliophysics Decadal Survey, Key Science Goal 2: "Determine the dynamics and coupling of Earths magnetosphere, ionosphere, and atmosphere and their response to solar and terrestrial inputs". 
  
 The project's objectives are also relevant to space weather effects on societally dependent satellites, which traces to the 2018 NASA Strategic Plan, Strategic Objective 1.1, subsection "Safeguarding and Improving Life on Earth". 
 
 
 
Nuno Loureiro (PI) Muni Zhou (FI) 
Institution:  Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
 
19-HELIO20-0021, Multiscale dynamics of magnetic flux ropes in the heliosphere 
 
Multiscale dynamics of magnetic flux ropes in the heliosphere 
  
 The solar corona, Earth's magnetosheath and the heliopause are examples of heliospheric environments whose behavior is determined by complex, turbulent magnetic-field dynamics. Questions such as the structure of those fields, as well as their ability to accelerate particles or locally heat the plasma, have remained at the forefront of plasma physics research for several decades. A useful way to conceptualize these environments is to describe them as vast collections of interacting flux ropes ranging across a variety of spatial scales. A key process determining such interaction is magnetic reconnection, which enables the growth of the coherence length of the magnetic field, as well as the transfer of magnetic energy to the plasma particles.  
  
 We propose to conduct detailed investigations of the statistical dynamics of merging flux ropes by developing analytical models and combining and testing them with both MHD and particlein-cell (PIC) simulations --- thus addressing both collisional and collisionless regimes, and also enabling a phased approach from the relatively simpler (MHD) to the more complex (kinetic) problem. The PIC simulations will directly allow the study of particle energization in such systems composed of a large ensemble of interacting flux ropes. The theoretical and numerical results of this study are relevant to the interpretation of observations made by ongoing NASA missions such as MMS, Parker Solar Probe and the Voyagers. 
 
 
 
Merav Opher (PI) Warren Shelley (FI) 
Institution:  Boston University  
19-HELIO20-0023, Determining the Mechanism responsible for the Split Heliotail Using the SHIELD model: MHD with Kinetic Neutrals 
 
The heliosphere is a shield which protects the Solar System from energetic galactic cosmic rays and interstellar gas and dust. The heliosphere is a template for all other astrospheres, enabling predictions about the conditions necessary for habitable planets. The canonical view of the shape of the heliosphere has been that of a long comet-like tail. Currently it is being revisited whether it is a long comet-like shape, is bubble shaped, or is ‘croissant’-like (or split-tail), prompted by observations and modelling (Opher et al. 2015; Pogorelov et al. 2015; Izmodenov & Alexashov 2015; Dialynas et al. 2017; Schwadron & Bzowski 2018). Opher et al. (2015) have suggested that the heliosphere consists of a two lobe (‘croissant’-like; ‘split-tail’) structure. This study was performed with a 3D MHD code which treats the ionized and neutral hydrogen (H) atoms as fluids. 
   
 One direct way to probe the structure of the tail is through energetic neutral atom (ENA) maps. This has been done by the Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) at energies of 0.5-6keVz. ENA images of the tail by IBEX showed a multi-lobe structure, which was attributed to signatures of slow and fast wind within the long heliospheric tail as part of the 11-year solar cycle (McComas et al. 2013; Zirnstein et al. 2017). Additionally, based on ENA observations from the Cassini spacecraft (Dialynas et al. 2017), there have been suggestions that the heliosphere is round. 
  
 Previous studies that have described the neutrals kinetically have argued that this approach removes the two-lobe structure of the heliosphere (Pogorelov et al. 2015; Izmodenov & Alexashov 2018). However, these models include internal numerical dissipation or in the case of Izmodenov & Alexashov 2018 supress communication between the solar and the interstellar wind. The recently developed Solar-wind with Hydrogen Ion Exchange and Large-scale Dynamics (SHIELD) model is a self-consistent kinetic-MHD model of the outer heliosphere. The SHIELD model couples the MHD solution for a single plasma fluid to the kinetic solution from the neutral H atoms (Michael et al. 2020a, Michael 2019) using AMPS, which is a 3D direct simulation Monte Carlo model. Using the same boundary conditions as in Opher et al. (2015) with the SHIELD model it was found that the split tail remains even when the neutral hydrogen atoms are modelled kinetically (Michael et al. 2020b). These results indicate that magnetic reconnection downtail and/or instabilities play a role in the formation of the split-tail structure.  
 
 This proposal will use the SHIELD model to determine the physical mechanism responsible for the Split Heliotail. I will employ a step-by-step approach to this by  (a) isolating the effect of the motion of the heliosphere through the ISM (as in Izmodenov & Alexashov 2018) with no reconnection, investing the effect of increasing the speed of this motion. This will allow the instabilities which develop to be pinned down. A further step (b) I will include the interstellar magnetic field (BISM) and repeat step (a) to investigate the combined effect of both instabilities and reconnection and determine which effect dominates. Finally, (c) I will vary the BISM orientation and magnitude (one of the unknowns) in order to assess the effect of different pressures on the heliosphere and pin-down under which conditions the split-tail occur. This research will address fundamental questions on the mechanisms which determine the shape of the heliosphere. This proposal responds directly to two of the four survey goals of the most recent Heliophysics Decadal Survey: 1. Determine the interaction of the Sun with the solar system and the interstellar medium and 2. Discover and characterize fundamental processes that occur both within the heliosphere and throughout the universe. 
 
 
 
Stanislav Sazykin (PI) Anastasia Newheart (FI) 
Institution:  William Marsh Rice University  
19-HELIO20-0027, Role of Traveling ionospheric Disturbances (TIDs) Originating at High Latitudes in Generation of Equatorial F-region Plasma Irregularities 
 
Localized and highly structured plasma depletions are often observed in the low-latitude ionosphere. They are thought to be a dramatic manifestation of the generalized Rayleigh-Taylor (R-T) instability, though the conditions that give rise to this instability in the ionosphere are not understood. Depletions occur during both geomagnetic quiet and disturbed times but occur most frequently during geomagnetic storms. Because R-T linear growth rates are highly dependent on the electric field environment, prompt penetration electric fields (PPEFs) may have a dramatic effect on depletion formation, but it is difficult to distinguish between the effect of a PPEF and thermospheric disturbances from geomagnetic activity.  
 
 An important thermospheric disturbance in the ionosphere-thermosphere system is large scale atmospheric gravity waves. This buoyancy wave pulls the ionosphere along with it forming large scale traveling ionospheric disturbances (LSTIDs).  TIDs and plasma depletions are both likely to form during geomagnetically disturbed time periods and are often observed together. TIDs have recently been proposed as a triggering mechanism for plasma depletions TIDs both cause the electric field in the ionosphere to oscillate and cause changes in plasma density. Changes in the electric field environment could change the R-T linear growth rates, possibly creating conditions conducive to plasma depletions. Changes in plasma density could change the R-T growth rates as well or act as a perturbation to seed the instability. The relationship between plasma depletions and TIDs has not been well studied. 
 
 We will focus on model-data comparison between two new and unique datasets (global maps of 
GPS TEC with high spatial and temporal resolution, and ISS FPMU ion density measurements at ~400 km altitude) and numerical simulations using SAMI3/RCM and GITM.  We will examine the role of TIDs versus the role of PPEFs in forming low/mid latitude depletions during geomagnetic disturbances. Our research will try to answer these scientific questions: (1)  What are the effects of penetration electric fields on ionospheric electron density? (2) How does depletion occurrence vary with TID activity at low-latitude and mid-latitude? (3) What are the linear growth rates of the R-T instability, calculated from the theory, for the conditions of observed depletions, and do they correlate with observed occurrence of depletions? (4) How do penetration electric fields change the linear growth rates of the RT instability? How does TID activity change the linear growth rates of the RT instability? 
  
 Obtaining answers to these questions will be highly relevant to the NASA objective of understanding the Sun and its interactions with the Earth. The ionospheres reactions to geomagnetic disturbances from the solar wind or magnetosphere provide a unique opportunity to better our understanding of how solar activity effect the upper atmosphere. The dramatic changes in TEC that we will analyze in this project have profound space weather consequences. In addition, this work is of particular relevance now because of the GOLD and ICON NASA missions. 
 
 
 
Daniel Scheeres (PI) Vishal Ray (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
19-HELIO20-0018, Development Of Improved Drag Coefficient Models For More Accurate Thermospheric Density Estimation 
 
Estimates of atmospheric densities from satellite data not only allow the calibration of semiempirical atmospheric density models used in orbit determination but provide invaluable insights into the evolution of Earth's atmosphere and its causes such as anthropogenic factors. Therefore, any biases in the derived densities have far reaching consequences from both engineering and scientific perspectives. One of the primary biases is introduced in the inversion of atmospheric densities from satellite data as a result of simplifying assumptions pertaining to the drag coefficient. Consequently, accurate modeling of drag coefficients is of utmost importance for reducing biases in orbit-derived densities. We propose to use Fourier-series models to develop corrections to the standard drag coefficient model based on their observed utility in estimating solar radiation pressure (SRP) and thermal radiation coefficients. The main advantages of this approach are orthogonality of Fourier coefficients that allows their integration in a filtering methodology and a lack of need for the estimates of physical parameters. We have identified two central objectives of the project that broadly revolve around the development, implementation and application of these improved models. The first objective is the application of the developed Fourier models to infer physical parameters related to gas-surface interactions from estimates of the Fourier coefficients. This will be carried out by estimating a time-series of Fourier coefficients for GRACE and CHAMP satellite data across varying geomagnetic activity. The models will also be used to improve semi-analytical theories of orbit evolution in the presence of drag by allowing the drag-coefficient to vary in time. 
 
 The second application concerns the estimation of atmospheric densities using the developed drag-coefficient models. We will be estimating atmospheric densities from CHAMP and GRACE data using three state-of-the-art density estimation techniques with the Fourier models. We expect a reduction in biases in thermospheric densities estimated from satellite data in the process.  
 
 One of the overarching science questions for the heliophysics research program is how do the geospace and planetary space environments respond to variations in the Sun’s activity. Thermospheric density derived using satellite data is key to understanding the response of the upper atmosphere. Therefore, this research is highly relevant for NASA’s heliophysics division under the Living With a Star (LWS) program. Improving the accuracy of derived thermospheric densities is important in understanding the multi-decadal changes in the thermosphere; a key science goal identified by the Atmosphere-Ionosphere-Magnetosphere Interactions (AIMI) panel in the decadal survey [3]. It is also important to note that most atmospheric models assimilate satellite-derived densities; therefore any biases introduced during the inversion is detrimental to these models. Consequently, forecasting capabilities of such models are affected. Since density forecasting is integral to enabling an effective Space Weather and Climatology (SWaC) capability, the research is relevant to the Space Weather program as well.  
 
 Additionally, the work addresses several aspects of the Earth science research division of SMD. It will enable improvements in the prediction of LEO satellites and therefore reduce the risks associated with these missions through better maneuver planning for orbit maintenance and collision avoidance. This is in accordance with Advanced Component Technology (ACT) subelement of the Advanced Technologies Initiative (ATI) listed under ROSES A.43. The research is also relevant for upper atmospheric modeling and analysis (A.18 and A.20). Atmospheric density is a key parameter in the quest of NASA Earth Sciences Divisions goal of understanding how the global Earth system is changing. 
 
 
 
Hui Zhang (PI) Xi Lu (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Alaska, Fairbanks  
19-HELIO20-0029, Statistical Study of Foreshock Density Holes 
 
Upstream of Earth’s bow shock there is a region filled with back streaming particles from the shock called foreshock. There are various transient structures in this dynamic region. Our topic focuses on one of these transient phenomena, named foreshock density hole, which shows a density depletion. Because the dynamics pressure inside density holes is very small, density holes may deform the bow shock and magnetopause, generate field-aligned currents into the ionosphere, trigger auroral brighting, exciting ULF waves in the magnetosphere. Therefore, density holes may play an important role in the solar wind-magnetosphere-ionoshere coupling. The objective of our research project is to investigate foreshock density holes. We will determine their characteristics, occurrence rate and its dependence on solar wind/IMF conditions, how they form and develop, and whether they can interact with other transient structures upstream of Earths bow shock. 
  
 Data from the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) spacecraft will be used to identify foreshock density holes. Data from ACE and/or WIND will be used to determine the solar wind/IMF conditions. Quantitative criteria will be used to identify foreshock density holes. In our preliminary study, 255 foreshock density holes have been identified. We are going to do a statistical study to determine their characteristics (duration, density depletion, shear angle, plasma derivative angle, etc.), occurrence rate and its dependence on solar wind/IMF conditions (solar wind velocity, IMF orientation). In addition, we will analyze some cases to identify the possible occurrence mechanisms of density holes and the relations with other transient structures in the foreshock, such as well-known hot flow anomalies (HFAs), hot diamagnetic cavities (HDCs), foreshock cavities (FCs), foreshock cavitons, foreshock bubbles and large-amplitude magnetic pulsations (SLAMS). 
  
 This project is targeted at NASA’s objective to ‘explore the physical processes in the space environment from the Sun to the Earth and throughout the solar system’ and ‘advance our understanding of the connections that link the Sun, the Earth, planetary space environments, and the outer reaches of our solar system’. The proposed work will take advantage of the high resolution MMS data to improve our understanding about Earth’s bow shock environment and the structures embedded in its foreshock region. By studying the density holes, we could get to know how foreshock fluctuations affect Earth’s magnetosphere and future impact on humans life. 
