Stuart Bale (PI) Claire Gasque (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Berkeley  
20-HELIO20-0015, Investigating Dust-Spacecraft Interactions in the Inner Heliosphere with Parker Solar Probe/FIELDS 
 
We propose to use data from Parker Solar Probe (PSP) in conjunction with modeling efforts to better understand the interactions between spacecraft and interplanetary dust in the near-Sun environment. As the closest manmade object to the Sun, PSP is uniquely situated to provide insitu dust measurements in this environment. The PSP/FIELDS instrument suite, which measures electric and magnetic fields in the vicinity of the spacecraft, can detect changes in spacecraft floating potential from plasma clouds generated by interplanetary dust impacts. Little work has been done yet to examine the detailed Time Domain Sampler (TDS) waveforms of individual dust impacts on PSP, which are available from PSP's first two solar encounters and can be commanded for future encounters. Additionally, samples of these waveforms contain neverbefore-observed magnetic signatures of dust impacts, which may represent the first direct measurement of currents produced by the differential movement of electrons and ions from dust impacts in space. In this work, we propose to catalog and model PSP/FIELDS dust impact waveforms to better understand the physics of interactions between dust and spacecraft, and to better inform statistical studies conducted using this data. By improving our understanding of interplanetary dust, this work will address NASA’s SMD Heliophysics research goal to advance our understanding of the connections between space environments. It will also play an important role in understanding the hazards posed by the dust environment to future spacecraft missions.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Veronica Bindi (PI) Siqi Wang (FI) 
Institution:  University of Hawaii, Honolulu  
20-HELIO20-0030, 3D time-dependent modeling of galactic cosmic ray propagation through interplanetary coronal mass ejections 
 
The goal of this proposal is to accurately describe the shielding effect on galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) caused by interplanetary coronal mass ejections (ICMEs) by developing a 3D timedependent GCR transport model during the ICMEs, which will be modeled as propagating diffusion barriers.The model parameters will be tuned using multi-detector measurements throughout different locations of the heliosphere for a selection of ICME events.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Jacob Bortnik (PI) Ning Kang (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Los Angeles  
20-HELIO20-0033, Investigating the Propagation of Whistler-Mode Waves Using a Versatile Ray Tracing Model 
 
The proposed project aims at understanding the propagation of whistler-mode waves in realistic conditions that are too complex to be modeled in previous ray tracing techniques. These conditions includes non-dipole magnetic fields (e.g. the highly compressed dayside magnetic fields of Earth and stretched long tail in the Earth's nightside), more complex spatial distribution of plasma density, and plasma velocity distributions that cannot be described by simple analytical expressions. To this end we propose the creation of a ray tracing code that is capable of dealing with arbitrary models of magnetic field and plasma density, as well as arbitrary velocity distribution functions, in the form of either an analytical expression or discrete data (based on observations or other models). The proposed work is highly relevant to the goals of NASA Heliophysics Science and Technology Roadmap, including 1) understanding the role of turbulence and waves in the transport of mass, momentum, and energy; 2) understanding the coupling of the Earth’s magnetosphere-ionosphere -atmosphere system, and its response to external and internal forcing 3) understanding the role of the sun and its variability in driving change in the Earth's atmosphere, the space environment, and planetary objects.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Maher Dayeh (PI) Samuel Hart (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Texas, San Antonio  
20-HELIO20-0023, Understanding the Origins and Acceleration Processes of 3He-Rich Solar Energetic Particle Events 
 
Scientific Background: Solar Energetic Particles (SEPs) are particles of solar origin that get accelerated to speeds significantly larger than the ambient plasma permeating the interplanetary space, and they have a substantial influence on space weather in the near-Earth environment. Production of SEPs stems from a multitude of solar sources, one such source being solar flares near active regions on the solar surface. The composition of SEPs produced via solar flares have significantly larger 3He abundances than other SEP sources and are thus termed 3He-rich SEP events. The acceleration and origin of 3He-rich SEPs continue to be puzzling, and is the subject of this proposed investigation.  
 
Objective: We will study these events using multiple spacecraft, including the most recently launched Parker Solar Probe (PSP) and Solar Orbiter missions, and we will complement the insitu measurements from these missions with remote observations from the Solar Dynamic Observatory (SDO) and EUV telescopes onboard the STEREO and SOHO missions. The main objective is to answer the following science questions: Question 1. What causes the variability in the spectral properties among 3He-rich SEP events? Question 2. What causes the large longitudinal spread of some, but not all, 3He-rich SEP events? Question 3. What mechanism(s) are responsible for the uncorrelated heavy ion and 3He enhancements in 3He-rich SEP events?  
 
Methodology: Using in-situ and remote multi-spacecraft observations, we will perform spectral, elemental abundance, and correlative analysis of 3He-rich SEP events. By surveying all 3He-rich SEP events that occurred during solar cycles 23, 24, and the rising phase of 25, we will create a comprehensive set of flares producing 3He-rich SEPs as well as any relevant characteristics about the flare, its nearby environment, and the conditions of the interplanetary medium at the flare onset. Through this dataset, we will examine the correlations between flare properties and the spectral and relative enhancement variations commonly observed. We will then expand our analysis to multi-spacecraft observations of single 3He-rich SEP events, examining similarities and contrasting them with events observed by only a single spacecraft. With the advent of PSP and Solar orbiter, the likelihood of multi-spacecraft observations of isolated 3He-rich events has considerably grown, and their proximity to the Sun enables, for the first time, examining the characteristics of these events with a much greater accuracy than near-Earth missions.  
 
Anticipated Results: Using a large set of 3He-rich events, we will (1) Quantify the relation between spectral and abundance properties with associated solar sources, (2) Identify the cause of a single event’s spread over large heliographic longitudes, and (3) advance our current knowledge of the underlying acceleration and transport mechanisms governing the most recent observations and theories regarding 3He-rich SEP events. Scientific Relevance: Our proposed work sets out to characterize the mechanism(s) governing the origins and acceleration of 3Herich SEP events in the solar atmosphere. A deep understanding of the underlying physical processes of SEPs can greatly improve space weather forecasting capabilities. Furthermore, the acceleration region of 3He-rich SEPs could be the same as that of the solar wind meaning the two may not be entirely independent. Further understanding of 3He-rich SEPs will thus bring us closer to closure of the long-standing coronal heating problem. 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
Scot Elkington (PI) Daniel da Silva (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
20-HELIO20-0002, Advancing Radiation Belt Physics through Robust Computation of Adiabatic Invariants 
 
This is a FINESST proposal to fund the Future Investigator Daniel da Silva to work with Dr. 
Scot Elkington at CU Boulder on a project around adiabatic invariants and radiation belt physics. This proposal is to be reviewed within the Heliophysics section. 
   
 This work will address the calculation of global adiabatic invariants governing charged particle motion in the Earths magnetosphere.  In particular, the work will undertake comparative investigations of adiabatic invariants calculated under the assumptions implicit in varying empirical and physically-based magnetic field models, including global MHD simulations of the Earths inner magnetosphere.  The results of this study will elucidate the robustness of features seen in phase space density profiles observed in the Van Allen radiation belts and provide a toolset for future implementation and analysis of MHD/test particle results in an appropriate invariant space. 
 Methods/Tools include the development of new code to work with output of the 
LyonFedderMobarry (LFM)global dynamic model, and analysis code to compare to phase space distribution profiles from the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP).  
  
 These goals trace back to the following NASA and Decadal goals for Heliophysics. By bridging dynamic modeling and in-situ observation with adiabatic invariants, it serves the following NASA Heliophysics goals: 
 - Develop the knowledge and capability to detect and predict extreme conditions in space to protect life and society and to safeguard human and robotic explorers beyond Earth  - Explore the physical processes in the space environment from the Sun to the Earth and throughout the solar system  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Lindsay Glesener (PI) Yixian Zhang (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Minnesota  
20-HELIO20-0016, Observing solar coronal jets and flares: analysis with current multispacecraft data and development for FOXSI-4 
 
The proposed research aims to advance our understanding of particle acceleration through observations of solar coronal jets and solar flares. It consists of two specific projects: analysis of particular coronal jets in extreme ultraviolet and X-rays, and development for the FOXSI-4 
sounding rocket experiment. The first project will investigate the possible driver for an observed phenomenon that is not predicted by current models, through DEM analysis (with consistency checks between different instruments) and jet velocity estimation. The second project will contribute to the FOXSI-4 experiment by developing scientific requirements through simulations and performing detector calibration. The proposed research will take advantage of state-of-theart instruments and extend our knowledge of jet formation mechanisms, as well as advance toward the next generation of high-energy solar instruments.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Raluca Ilie (PI) Mei-Yun Lin (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign  
 
20-HELIO20-0022, The Curious Case of Heavy Ions and Their Journey Through Space 
 
The proposal is to quantify the role of the heavy ions in the Earth’s ionosphere-magnetosphere system with further development of the polar wind model. Atomic N+, O+, and molecular N2+, NO+, and O2+ ions, are often thought to be gravitationally bounded, and only populate the Earth's lower atmosphere. Molecular ions are expected to undergo recombination reactions to form a pair of neutral atoms, due to the short dissociative recombination lifetime. Therefore, they are required to obtain the additional energy on a short time-scale in order to escape from the Earth's ionosphere. Although past observations show the importance of the heavy ions in the high-altitude ionosphere and magnetosphere, the mechanisms responsible for accelerating the ionospheric heavy ions from eV to keV energies are still largely unknown. In the proposal, we seek to solve for the production and transport of all relevant heavy ions species (N+, O+, N2+, NO+, and O2+) in the Earth's polar wind region and provide answers the following science questions: 
  
1.	What are the competing mechanisms to produce and transport all ionospheric heavy ions, including the molecular species, along open magnetic field lines?  
2.	How does the three-dimensional spatial distribution of heavy ions outflow, including molecular species, change during the geomagnetically active times? 
  
This project combines advanced numerical tools to systematically examine the effect of season, solar activity, and wave heating on the evolution and structure of ionospheric outflow, by tracking the vertical transport of all relevant ion species along open magnetic field lines, as well as the horizontal transport across the polar cap as driven by solar wind conditions. We will further develop the Seven ion Polar Wind Outflow Model (7iPWOM) to track the behavior of all major ionospheric species in the polar wind, from low altitude ionosphere to several Earth radii. The 7iPWOM solves the transport equations for e-, H+, He+, N+, O+, N2+, NO+, and O2+ below 1000 km altitude, and applies a transition to a kinetic particle-in-cell (PIC) solution above, which enables the inclusion of wave-particle interactions (WPI) and Coulomb collisions, necessary for the transport and acceleration of heavier species. Because the heavy ions are mainly produced from the suprathermal electron (SE) impact and chemical reactions in the topside ionosphere, the advanced schemes for SE impact and competing chemical reactions relevant to the heavy ions in the Earth’s F2 region or above will be completed and applied in the 7iPWOM. Therefore, the 7iPWOM will be the first and only polar wind model to have the capability to study the behavior of the heavy ions, other than O+, in the Earth’s ionospheric outflow. 
  
 The work can augment our knowledge of the plasma transport processes from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere, and help interpret the observations of the heavy ions, including molecular species, in the ionosphere-magnetosphere system from various missions, such as Arase satellite and ARTEMIS spacecraft. Therefore, this proposal will enhance, complement, and augment the scientific yield from operating Heliophysics missions while guiding the development of new instrumentation and space missions, which is highly relevant to NASA's Heliophysics Program. The proposed study also has the potential to explain the changes in exospheric morphology, and could lead to a better understanding of planetary atmospheric evolution based on the knowledge of the history of the Earth, which is aligned with Planetary Research Program. Overall, determining the contribution of the heavy ions in the polar wind is relevant to one of strategic objectives in Exploration and Scientific Discovery, ``Advance discovery in emerging fields by identifying and exploiting interdisciplinary opportunities between traditional science disciplines'' (Science 2020-2024: A Vision for Scientific Excellence).  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Charles Kankelborg (PI) Catharine Bunn (FI) 
Institution:  Montana State University, Bozeman  
20-HELIO20-0026, Transition Region Activity of the Sun and Stars 
 
Magnetic reconnection is a mysterious and powerful occurrence in astrophysical plasmas wherein mag- netic field lines reconfigure and induce nearly-Alfve`nic plasma flows. Evidence of supersonic flows accel- erated by magnetic reconnection appear in the wings of transition region lines of stars, as well as in the disk-integrated spectrum of the Sun-as-a-star. If the emission due to these supersonic flows can be isolated from the total spectral line radiance of a star, it could be used to develop a metric with which to estimate transition region magnetic reconnection activity. 
 One advantage of living so close to the Sun is that its disk can be resolved in great detail. Smallscale transient magnetic reconnection events are a constant presence across the solar disk, even in the quiet Sun. They are observed as suprathermal broadenings or enhancements in the wings of transition region emission lines, a phenomenon known as explosive events. These resolvable explosive events provide a pathway to isolating the emission due to supersonic flows from the rest of the solar disk emission. I propose to create an explosive event detection method that will be applied to a data cube built from a unique set of high-spectral-range, far-ultraviolet Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) full-disk observations. The resulting disk-integrated spectral profile of explosive events will allow me to quantify their contribution to the Sun-as-astar spectrum, as well as estimate the remaining unresolved supersonic emission. 
 
The characteristic shape of the explosive event spectral profile will then be fit to the wings of 
Sun-like stars, such as α Centauri A, whose far-ultraviolet spectrum has been observed by the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) aboard the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). This analysis will provide an estimate of the flux contribution from magnetic reconnection activity in stellar transition regions, which can be compared with other metrics of stellar activity to investigate further possible connections. 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Maria Kazachenko (PI) Dennis Tilipman (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
20-HELIO20-0004, Toward Improved Understanding of Photospheric Magnetic Energy Input and The Chromospheric & Coronal Response in the Quiet Sun 
 
In this proposal, we aim to answer two general questions: how much magnetic energy (or Poynting flux) is transferred through the quiet-Sun photosphere (i.e. surface), and how the overlaying layers of the solar atmosphere respond to these energy injections. To this end, we will use archival data from Hinode, IRIS, and Sunrise missions, and perform a series of velocity, magnetic field and electric field inversions. We will also make use of DKIST capabilities if the data become available. 
  
 Poynting flux has been quantified in active regions, but not in the quiet Sun; therein lies the novelty of this work. We make use of the electric field inversion method PDFI, which computes Poynting flux and the flux of magnetic helicity. The latter is also important, as it quantifies the degree of twistedness of magnetic field lines and is therefore a proxy for the amount of stored magnetic energy. Using multi-wavelength observations, we will then investigate spatial and temporal correlations between photospheric maps of Poynting and helicity fluxes and images of the overlaying layers of solar atmosphere. 
  
 The PDFI method relies on knowing two vector quantities: velocity and magnetic field. Magnetic field and line-of-sight velocity will be computed (if they are not included in archival data products) using spectropolarimetric inversions of Stokes vectors. Horizontal velocity will be derived using correlation tracking on magnetic field data and using a machine-learning algorithm DeepVel, which is trained on simulations to reproduce ""realistic"" flows. Using these quantities and Faraday's law, the PDFI method computes electric field vectors and, subsequently, Poynting and helicity fluxes. Since the data we will use have a relatively low signal-to-noise ratio, we will assess the fidelity of our results using radiative transfer magnetohydrodynamic simulations. 
  
 The proposed work is of direct relevance to NASA Heliophysics goals and objectives. By quantifying the energetic output of the quiet Sun, we can shed light on the question of coronal heating, which directly addresses one of the key science challenges of the Solar & Space Physics Decadal Survey, “...  how the Sun’s magnetism creates its hot, dynamic atmosphere” (SHP-2). Our effort to better understand magnetic energy supplied for coronal heating also corresponds to the fourth science goal from the Survey, “to discover and characterize fundamental processes that occur within the heliosphere...”.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Marc Lessard (PI) Niharika Godbole (FI) 
Institution:  University of New Hampshire, Durham  
20-HELIO20-0027, Development and Testing of a Low-Resource Time-of-Flight Ion Mass Spectrometer 
 
The Thermal Ion Gated Time of Flight (TIGTOF) is being developed as a low-cost plasma instrument designed to measure in-situ O+ and N2+ thermal ion fluxes during Type II ion upflow events. TIGTOF is expected to resolve relative abundances as low as 5%, and is able to resolve mass variation as low as 12%, allowing it to easily distinguish between O+ and N2+ particles at rocket altitude. The TIGTOF prototype requires extensive modification, calibration, and testing before it can be flown. This redesign process will be guided by a numerical model that simulates the instrument’s response. TIGTOF is intended to fly as part of the instrument payload of a future sounding rocket. The information provided by this instrument will further our understanding of Type II ion upflow, and better inform our atmospheric models by proper characterization of the energy budget. 
  
 The relevance and significance of the proposed work is highlighted in NASA's 2018 
Heliophysics and Living With a Star Programs (Strategic Objective 1.1), to ""understand the Sun and its effects on the solar system, the Earth, other planets and solar system bodies, (and) the interplanetary environment"", including space weather.  The science goals of this Strategic Objective refer to physical processes in the space environment, including how the Sun interacts with the Earth.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Wen Li (PI) Sheng Huang (FI) 
Institution:  Boston University  
20-HELIO20-0010, Hiss in the Plasmasphere and Plumes: Global Distribution Using Machine Learning Technique and Their Effects on Global Loss of Energetic Electrons 
 
1. Science Objectives 
 The primary goal of the proposed project is to quantify the role of hiss waves in the plasmasphere and plumes respectively in global energetic electron loss using machine learning technique, data analysis, and simulations. Hiss is known to cause the loss of tens to hundreds of keV electrons in the Earth’s radiation belts. Statistical studies have found that hiss wave amplitude is stronger and occurrence rate is higher inside the plasmaspheric plume, potentially contributing to faster energetic electron losses. Quantification of the plume hiss effect depends significantly on the distribution and evolution of global electron density, but the currently available electron density and hiss wave models have not accurately captured the dynamic plume structure and the hiss waves therein yet. Therefore, we propose to answer the following 3 science questions in the proposed project. 
1)	How do total electron densities in the plasmasphere and plumes evolve on a global scale during various geomagnetic activities? 
2)	How do hiss wave intensities evolve in the plasmasphere and plumes respectively during various geomagnetic activities? 
3)	What is the quantitative role of hiss waves in the plasmasphere and plumes respectively in global electron loss in the Earth’s inner magnetosphere? 
  
 
2.	Methodology 
 The project will first use machine learning technique to infer the global evolution of hiss wave amplitude and total electron density in the Earth’s inner magnetosphere, based on the observations by Van Allen Probes and various input parameters from the OMNI dataset. We will evaluate the model structure and data combination which produces the optimum prediction performance. We will use the hiss wave amplitude and total electron density data output from machine learning as the inputs to energetic electron simulations. The global evolution of energetic electron fluxes will be modeled using the 3D Fokker Planck simulation. The simulated electron flux will be compared with the Van Allen Probes observation, and the quantitative role of hiss waves in the plasmasphere and plumes will be evaluated, respectively. 
  
3.	Perceived Significance and Relevance 
 The scientific outcomes of the proposed project will significantly improve our understanding of quantitative hiss effects in the plasmasphere and plumes respectively, which have not been well understood and accurately quantified yet. The proposed project will provide the following scientific significance and impacts. 
1)	Determine the global evolution of electron density and hiss wave amplitude with high spatial and temporal resolution especially in the plumes 
2)	Reveal the geomagnetic conditions favoring plume hiss occurrence 
3)	Quantify the role of plume hiss in global energetic electron evolution especially during the presence of plumes 
4)	Provide insights into how to properly design a machine learning model for a specific problem in space physics and extend the method to various tasks in the future 
  
 The proposed project of quantifying the effect of hiss in the plasmasphere and plumes on energetic electron dynamics in the Earth’s magnetosphere is closely relevant to NASA’s Strategic Goal 1.1, “Understand the Sun, Earth, Solar System, and Universe”, and Objective 2 of 
Heliophysics Division, “Advance our understanding of the connections that link the Sun, the Earth, planetary space environments, and the outer reaches of our solar system”. Applying machine learning to space weather prediction contributes to the overarching goal of Heliophysics Research Program, which is to “develop the knowledge and capability to detect and predict extreme conditions in space…”. This project will combine data analysis with different modeling tools to advance our understanding of hiss effects on energetic electron dynamics in the inner magnetosphere, thus perfectly fits into the Heliophysics ""Magnetospheres"" Division.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Robert Marshall (PI) Riley Reid (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
20-HELIO20-0035, Design of a novel imaging relativistic electron instrument for future radiation belt missions 
 
Energetic particle precipitation (EPP) from Earth's radiation belts have a major impact on upper and mid-atmospheric climate and significantly affect spacecraft performance in Low-Earth Orbit. EPP directly relates to the NASA Heliophysics Research Goal of detecting and predicting extreme conditions in space to protect human and robotic explorers. By measuring the pitch angle distribution of charged particles, or the angle between the particle's trajectory and the local magnetic field vector, we can quantify the spatial and temporal variation of EPP and how this distribution changes in response to magnetospheric waves and geomagnetic storms. However, previous space physics missions have at best 10 degree pitch angle resolution. At the equator, the loss cone is typically less than 10 degrees full-angle, and therefore missions lack the angular resolution to fully resolve distributions near and within the loss cone, which would reveal insights into the driving wave-particle interactions. We propose a novel relativistic electron instrument that will make continuous measurements of electron pitch angle for the first time, revealing distributions within both equatorial and low-altitude loss cones, or more generally, any range of particle pitch angles. This concept utilizes position-sensitive detectors, commonly used in nuclear physics applications. Position-sensitive detectors will allow for continuous measurements of particle angle from a low-power and compact platform. Initial simulations have shown angular resolution with a 1-sigma confidence interval of 5 degrees for 5 MeV electrons. This proposal provides details on position-sensitive detectors, presents initial GEANT4 simulation results, and provides a timeline of efforts to develop this instrument concept through laboratory verification. By the end of this study, we will have a working instrument that will fully characterize pitch angle and energy for relativistic electrons that can be included in a future radiation belt mission. Measurements from this detector will expand existing knowledge on pitch angle distributions in Earth's magnetosphere.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
Petrus Martens (PI) Sumanth Rotti (FI) 
Institution:  Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.  
20-HELIO20-0020, Machine Learning-based Solar Energetic Particle Event Prediction using X-ray, Proton, and Electron Flux Data 
 
Solar energetic particle (SEP) events require accurate and efficient forecasting for a wide range of operations. In the view of NASA’s Artemis program to return to the Moon and further send humans to Mars, optimized forecasting methods are essential to protect our astronauts and their equipment. Besides, near-real-time (NRT) data analysis with optimized methods is essential to obtain robustness in the forecast. 
  
 Amongst several advanced SEP forecasting methods, RELEASE (Posner, 2007) and UMASEP (Núñez, 2011) are currently in primary operations that use particle fluxes as their input. Exploiting the fact that at 1-2MeV energies, the relativistic electrons travel close to the speed of light, Posner (2007) developed a method to forecast SEP events using electron flux data measured from the L1 point.  
  
 A machine learning (ML) methodology developed at the Data Mining Lab, GSU (Boubrahimi et al., 2017) using interpretable decision tree and vector autoregression model produced slightly better accuracy compared to UMASEP for high energy (>100 MeV) proton flux data. Inspired by the success of ML in several areas of technology as well, we aim to implement advanced ML methods to predict SEPs and improving the forecast. For this purpose, we utilize the proton and electron flux data from the GOES/SEM, SOHO/COSTEP and ACE/EPAM instruments. Also, we will use the GOES X-ray flux to complement the study for improved forecasting. 
  
 In this project, we propose to develop a multi-module ensemble of time series classifiers to forecast SEPs. We will be developing a multivariate time series (MVTS) benchmark dataset for this purpose. In the first module, we consider the X-ray and proton fluxes as input to the learners. 
For the second module, we will implement the X-ray and electron flux data. The results from the two modules will be ensembled using probability-based learners to obtain efficient forecasts with anticipation of reduced false alarm rates and improved warning time. The final aim of the proposal is to implement the developed ML model to operate with NRT data. 
  
 To our knowledge, the proposed research is the first of this kind that attempts to address the prediction of SEPs as an MVTS using an ensemble ML method. With that, we are confident of achieving a well-conditioned SEP forecasting pipeline and framework. This proposal agrees with the SMD Heliophysics goal of “developing space weather prediction capabilities for human and equipment safety.” We will make our techniques and codes available to the NASA Space Radiation Analysis Group at JSC in Houston and the Community Coordinated Modeling Center at NASA Goddard, as well as deposit them in publicly available repositories. 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Merav Opher (PI) Xiaohan Ma (FI) 
Institution:  Boston University  
20-HELIO20-0009, The structure of the heliosphere and heliotail with a Multi-ion and Kinetic Neutrals treatment 
 
There is on-going debate of the structure of the heliosphere and heliotail prompted by observations and modelling. The shape of the heliosphere was thought to resemble a long, comet tail. Opher et al. (2015) has shown that the magnetic tension force in the heliosheath (HS) (the region of shocked solar wind) is large enough to resist the plasma flow and collimate the HS flows into two lobes which results in a “croissant”-like heliosphere with a short tail and two lobes in the northern and southern hemisphere. This study was done with a 3D MHD model, which treats the solar wind ion and neutral hydrogen atoms in a multi-fluid treatment (Zank et al. 1996). 
  
 Previous studies that described the neutrals kinetically claim that this approach removes the twolobe structure of the heliosphere (Pogorelov et al. 2015; Izmodenov & Alexashov 2018).  Michael et al. (2021) used the newly developed Solar-wind with Hydrogen Ion Exchange and Large-scale Dynamics (SHIELD) model to test whether the two-lobe structure of the heliotail is removed with a kinetic treatment of neutrals. SHIELD is a self-consistent kinetic-MHD model of the outer heliosphere that couples the MHD solution for a single plasma fluid from the BATS-RUS MHD code to the kinetic solution for neutral hydrogen atoms solved by the  a 3D Monte Carlo model. This work shows that despite the difference in the neutral hydrogen solutions, the two-lobe structure remains, which are contrary to previous kinetic-MHD models.  
  
 An important assumption is that above models do not describe the pick-up ion (PUIs) as a separate component. As the Sun moves through the surrounding partially ionized medium, neutral hydrogen atoms penetrate the heliosphere, and through charge exchange with the supersonic solar wind, create a population of hot PUIs. The termination shock crossing by Voyager 2 demonstrated that the HS pressure is dominated by PUIs. The above models assume that the newly created ions are immediately assimilated into the solar wind and take on the characteristics of the local plasma after a charge-exchange event. Opher et al. (2020) used a novel MHD model that treats the PUIs as a separate fluid from the thermal component of the solar wind. The depletion of PUIs, due to charge exchange with the neutral hydrogen atoms of the interstellar medium in the HS, cools the heliosphere, ‘deflating’ it and leading to a narrower HS and a smaller and rounder shape. 
  
 This proposal will extend the SHIELD model to treat the solar wind as composed to a cold and hot components with a kinetic solution of the neutrals. This new improved model will form a self-consistent model that will allow me to explore the structure of the heliosphere and heliotail. With this newly extended SHIELD model I will be able to explore how the heliosphere and heliotail are affected in following steps: a) I will run steady state solutions of solar wind using an average conditions of solar cycles appropriate for solar minima conditions. I will run the model with different conditions of interstellar medium to determine the direction and intensity of the magnetic field of interstellar medium (B_ISM); b) I will compare the results with ENA maps to help solve the discrepancy between models and ENA observations. It can provide a comprehensive understand of ENA models and reference for future observations; c) I will use full solar cycle time dependent boundary with the determined B_ISM. By comparing with the flows and magnetic field measurements of voyager 1(V1) and 2, I will be able to tell whether this model can explain the observations and help solve the problem of flows on V1.  
  
 This proposal responds directly to two of the four survey goals of the most recent Heliophysics Decadal Survey: 1.Determine the interaction of the Sun with the solar system and the interstellar medium and 2. Discover and characterize fundamental processes that occur both within the heliosphere and throughout the universe.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Nikolai Pogorelov (PI) Dinesha Vasanta Hegde (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Alabama, Huntsville  
20-HELIO20-0021, Modeling Space Weather with Quantified Uncertainties 
 
The solar wind (SW) is a key driver of space weather at Earth and throughout the solar system. The transients in the SW are the source of recurrent geomagnetic activity. The largest geomagnetic storms are caused by solar coronal disturbances called coronal mass ejections (CMEs). They propagate through and interact with the SW. Predictions of CME arrival at Earth and the interplanetary magnetic field they carry are of importance for space weather forecasting. On the other hand, Parker Solar Probe (PSP) provides us with unique, in situ SW measurements at distances below 1 au from the Sun, which can help validate numerical models of the solar corona and inner heliosphere. The objective of this proposal is to perform such simulations and extract data along the Earth and PSP trajectories. The knowledge of uncertainties in boundary conditions, will make it possible to obtain our solutions with quantified uncertainties. Simulations will be accompanied by an appropriate analysis of spacecraft data and remote observations.  
  
 The proposed research will be performed initially with the Multi-Scale Fluid-Kinetic Simulation 
Suite (MS-FLUKSS) governed by the ADAPT-WSA boundary conditions and flux-rope-based 
CMEs. We will then switch to the new free-access software being developed in the Space Weather with Quantified Uncertainties (SWQU) project led by this projects PI. A one-year shift between these projects allows the student to use new developments efficiently. The enhancement of the observational data base that constrain simulation results is one of the strategic approaches to improve space weather forecasting. It also allows us to improve understanding of basic physical processes occurring in the inner heliosphere. 
  
 In the recent decade, the difficult task of understanding and predicting violent solar eruptions and their terrestrial impacts has become a strategic national priority, as it affects the daily life of humans, communication, transportation, power supplies, national defense, space travel, and more. Its importance is highlighted by the Promoting Research and Observations of Space Weather to Improve the Forecasting of Tomorrow Act (PL 116-181) passed by Congress in 2020. Advances in space weather research and forecasting have been made over the recent years due to the diversity of observation al data and improvements in theory and modeling. The research proposed in this project will help validate newly developed, publicly-accessible software for space weather predictions and provide the heliospheric community with the estimates of its reliability. Our planned project is directly related to the Science Mission Directorate Heliophysics Division's strategic objective to Build the Knowledge to Forecast Space Weather Throughout the Heliosphere.The results of our project will help understand physical processes in the heliosphere, Sun-Earth connection, and their effect on space weather. 
  
 The work to be performed by the FI is multi-faceted. On the one hand, this is the work with data from multiple spacecraft, especially, with the Parker Solar Probe (PSP) and OMNI data. This is of importance for understanding the structure of collisionless shocks in the SW. On the other hand, data-driven simulations of solar corona and inner heliosphere will be made. This will let FI get sufficient skills to excel in the future career. The proposed activity includes organization of SWQU usersmeetings, as well as preparing tutorials for the participants. The results will be disseminated through the Community Coordinated Modeling CenterInstitution:    
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Lorenzo Sironi (PI) Aaron Tran (FI) 
Institution:  Columbia University  
20-HELIO20-0006, Electron Heating from Ion to Debye Scale in Heliospheric Shocks 
 
In heliospheric plasmas, shock waves heat electrons via wave-particle interactions spanning ion Larmor to electron Debye length scales, replacing the inter-particle collisions of ordinary fluids.  We propose to fill a knowledge gap between macro- and micro-scale electron heating physics in collisionless heliospheric shocks.  In Year 1, we will map the parameter space of low-beta quasiperpendicular shocks using many 2D particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations, with Maxwellian upstream (pre-shock) electrons.  We will construct an interpretive map linking shock parameters (Mach number, magnetic field angle), macro/ion-scale structures that give bulk energy to electrons (wave precursors, cross-shock electric potential), and micro/electron-scale waves that scatter and heat.  To connect to realistic shock parameters, we'll provide scaling studies and an updated shock regime map of relevant instabilities.  In Year 2, we will fit simulated electron distributions with a 1D drift-kinetic model to infer a space-varying diffusion coefficient; this will give a quantitative link between shock macro- and micro-structure.  And, we will use more realistic, solar wind-like electron distributions with halo/strahl components; we'll see how electron heating changes, and track migration between different components. 
  
 Collisionless shocks are a ubiquitous physical process; many NASA missions in Heliophysics 
(MMS, THEMIS/ARTEMIS, STEREO, Wind) and Planetary Science (MAVEN, Juno, New Horizons) penetrate magnetospheric and interplanetary shocks.  The NASA Astrophysics mission Chandra sees collisionless shocks in supernova remnants and galaxy clusters, where shocked electrons with Te != Ti imprint upon X-ray emission spectra.  NASA's MMS is now returning data of unprecedented resolution from Earth's bow shock, a prime laboratory.  A large suite of modern shock simulations will strengthen MMS' science return and help us interpret shocks in magnetized plasmas from the solar system to the cosmic web.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Jeffrey Thayer (PI) Sarah Luettgen (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
20-HELIO20-0005, Simulating Hydrogen Transport through the Thermosphere and Exosphere 
 
Examining the exchange of hydrogen across the thermosphere-exosphere boundary requires a comprehensive model of the atmosphere. Circulation processes from the lower thermosphere and below, as well as solar input from above, affect the properties of the upper atmosphere in complex ways. The thermosphere-ionosphere-mesosphere-electrodynamics general circulation model (TIME-GCM) is a three-dimensional simulation of the upper stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere, and ionosphere which has been used as a tool to explore the movement of H through the atmosphere up to the exobase. However, the parameterized approach that the TIMEGCM uses to model the flux of H through the exobase requires further substantiation. This proposal seeks to ameliorate this problem by examining the validity of the parameterization used by the TIME-GCM, improving the calculation of the H flux between the exosphere and thermosphere, and exploring the physics behind the atmospheric processes which affect this flux. 
   
 This project will be aided by the work of the NASA Heliophysics Theory-Modeling-Simulation (HTMS) project called Coupled Exosphere-Thermosphere-Mesosphere System (ExoTherM) at the University of Colorado. The ExoTherM team is developing a particle model of the exosphere to couple to the fluid-based TIME-GCM. Their knowledge of the TIME-GCM and the ways in which it handles the thermosphere-exosphere boundary will expedite the project laid out in this proposal. 
   
 This project will first address the methodology and physics currently describing the H flux at the upper boundary of the TIME-GCM. We argue that a more accurate flux of H is found with a direct calculation using the model output near the exobase rather than with the TIME-GCM’s current parameterizations. Through performing this calculation, we will gauge the validity of these parameterizations. Our calculation, which can be corroborated by observations from TIMED/SABER, TIMED/GUVI and WHAM, will also improve estimates of the vertical distribution of H through the thermosphere. 
   
 Second, this project will address the relative impact of Jean’s escape and charge exchange on the H flux within the TIME-GCM. These two methods of H escape fluctuate in significance with the solar cycle. We will improve our understanding of these escape processes by examining and evaluating the TIME-GCM’s calculations of Jeans escape and charge exchange at the exobase. 
   
 Third, this project will assess how H flux variability due to processes at the TIME-GCM upper boundary impacts the plasmasphere. The density of H in the exosphere plays an important role in the refilling of the plasmasphere and decay rate of the ring current after a geomagnetic storm. Through use of the particle-fluid coupling schemes developed by the ExoTherM team and the mechanisms developed earlier in this fellowship effort, the H distribution in the exosphere will be available for different latitudes, longitudes, season and solar activity to assess its impact on the plasmasphere. We will feed these distributions into a plasmasphere model, performing a oneway coupling and creating a more accurate description of plasmaspheric H distribution and response. 
   
 Overall, this project will improve our understanding of how varying solar activity will affect the atmosphere as a system through the analysis of H transport. It will benefit the NASA-funded Global Lyman-alpha Imagers of the Dynamic Exosphere (GLIDE) and ExoCube 2 missions by complementing their measurements of H in the exosphere with a model representation. It will improve our ability to project orbit trajectories of satellites in Low Earth Orbit by enhancing models of upper atmospheric density. The exploration of H distribution will be beneficial to monitoring and predicting climate change since exospheric H abundance increases with anthropogenic methane in the atmosphere. Finally, an accurate picture of H transport on Earth can clarify the properties that make a planet habitable.  
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
Lara Waldrop (PI) Pratik Joshi (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign  
20-HELIO20-0025, Quantification of terrestrial hydrogen escape flux through thermal and non-thermal pathways 
 
One of the most important questions in heliophysics is to understand the loss of water, via hydrogen (H) escape, to space and its impact on the atmospheric evolution of planets. The maximum rate of terrestrial H escape is limited by its rate of upward diffusion through the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) and its dominant pathways in the terrestrial exosphere are the Jeans’ thermal escape and suprathermal escape via H-H+ charge-exchange and polar wind. 
  
 The proposed work will advance understanding of the fundamental process of atmospheric H escape through two primary objectives:  
 Science Objective 1 (SO1): To estimate hydrogen density in the Earth’s nightside exosphere.  Science Objective 2 (SO2): To investigate the relative contribution of thermal evaporation and charge exchange processes in governing the exospheric H distribution and its escape rates as a function of local time and solar activity. 
  
 The focus of this work is to quantify the total limiting flux of terrestrial H and its thermal and non-thermal escape rates self- consistently using data from NASA’s TIMED/GUVI, 
TIMED/SABER, and Cluster/CIS missions, along with model output from 
 SAMI3, the polar wind outflow model (PWOM), and MSIS-00, to constrain parametric equations governing the vertical transport and escape of H over the Earth's nightside.  
  
 The total vertical limiting flux will be derived independently using TIMED/SABER and used to constraint the radiative transfer model inversions for more accurate specification of exospheric H density. The improved specification of exobase density and temperature will then be used to quantify thermal and total non-thermal escape flux. At mid-latitudes, as H-H+ charge exchange is 
 the only dominant escape pathway, the analytic theory of H-H+ will be evaluated through independent estimates of proton density and  temperature from CLUSTER/CIS and exobase H density and temperature from TIMED/GUVI. At polar latitudes, the outflowing H + flux from the polar wind outflow model (PWOM) will be used to quantify the contribution of H-H+ charge exchange to total non- thermal escape and investigate implications for the analytic theory for H-H+ charge-exchange induced flux. 
  
 The work in this proposal would result in: 1) unprecedented estimates of H density over the nightside terrestrial exosphere 2) comprehensive characterization of local time and solar cycle variation of H escape mechanisms and their effect on the evolution of Earth’s hydrogen geocorona. 
  
 The resulting 2-dimensional asymmetric forward model from this work will advance the field of exospheric science it will be useful as a tool for several future investigations using other missions. In addition, the nightside neutral H densities and escape flux resulting from this work   will address a long-standing and critical data gap which will greatly benefit many Heliophysics investigations including but not limited to H-H+ charge exchange, oxygen density retrieval, diurnal plasmasphere refilling and more broadly temporal evolution of space weather effects. 
  
 The goal of this proposal to investigate the evolution of terrestrial atmosphere and characterize its dynamic interaction with the near- Earth plasma environment is directly relevant to NASA’s 
2018 Strategic Plan, Objective 1.1: ""Understand the Sun, Earth, Solar 
 System, and Universe"". The investigation of structure, energetics and time-dependent response of Earth’s atmosphere to thermal forcing and charge-exchange coupling is relevant to the strategic research focus area, RFA F3 (understand ion-neutral coupling) identified in the Heliophysics Science and Technology Roadmap for 2014-2033. In addition, it addresses the science challenge AIMI-2 (Understand the plasma-neutral coupling processes that give rise to local, regional, and global scale structures and dynamics in the AIM system) identified as high priority in the 2013 National Academy of Sciences Decadal Survey.    
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Ying Zou (PI) Katherine Davidson (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Alabama, Huntsville  
20-HELIO20-0013, Investigating Ionosphere-Thermosphere Coupling in the Nightside Auroral Oval 
 
Ionosphere-Thermosphere coupling, specifically in the nightside auroral oval, is an area of research that is not yet fully understood. These populations are coupled through a set of momentum equations, and are dominated by the ion drag force produced by ion-neutral collisions. Ion drifts are heavily influenced by geomagnetic activity through electrically connected field lines from the magnetotail to the high latitude ionosphere, so it is expected that geomagnetic activity would affect neutral winds as well. Using three different ground based instruments (SDIs, THEMIS ASIs, and PFISR), we aim to understand how geomagnetic activity affects ionosphere-thermosphere coupling by studying neutral wind response time  and magnitude to changes in plasma flows. This research will seek to understand the connections between solar variability and Earth's space environment, which directly relates to NASA's heliophysics objective.  
