Dorian Abbot (PI) Huanzhou Yang (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Chicago  
20-PLANET20-0086, The Effect of Cloud Microphysics on the Climate and Observational Prospects of Potentially Habitable Exoplanets 
 
A major goal of NASA’s upcoming JWST mission as well as missions in planning such as LUVOIR, OST, and HabEx is the characterization of the atmospheres of potentially habitable exoplanets. This requires both identifying promising targets and understanding what processes may limit measurements of atmospheric spectra. Recently three-dimensional calculations using global climate models have shown that water clouds are essential for both of these issues. These simulations have also exposed the high sensitivity of model results to assumptions in their cloud microphysical schemes. A typical assumption, for example, is that clouds contain droplets with a single radius that is hard-wired in the code. This is extremely important because scattering of shortwave radiation and absorption of longwave radiation depend strongly on the cloud droplet radius. As a result, if the cloud droplet radius is changed within a reasonable range, a simulated planet can easily go from habitable to Venus-like. Moreover, the size distribution of cloud particles will influence optimal atmospheric characterization strategies. For example, smaller cloud particles tend to interact more strongly with shortwave radiation and might be more problematic for transmission or reflected light spectroscopy than for emission spectroscopy. 
 
The first objective of this proposal is to determine how cloud microphysics affect the climate of potentially habitable exoplanets. We will investigate how cloud microphysics and the resulting cloud particle size distributions depend on planetary parameters such as stellar flux, stellar spectral energy distribution, gravity, atmospheric composition, available condensation nuclei, and atmospheric mass. We will then use climate models to calculate the resulting effect on climate and habitability. The second objective of this proposal is to determine how cloud microphysics will influence observational prospects for potentially habitable exoplanets.  
 
We will investigate the cloud microphysics of potentially habitable exoplanets using the CARMA model. CARMA is a highly versatile model that has been used for water clouds and aerosols on Earth, and clouds of various species on Venus, Mars, Titan, and hot-Jupiter exoplanets. Our first task will be to run CARMA in 1D mode for the full range of planetary parameters for potentially habitable exoplanets. We will couple the CARMA output to the spectral radiative model SMART. This will allow us to infer the impact of changes in cloud microphysics on climate and observational prospects. The 1D simulations will give us initial answers and allow us to sample the entire phase space of planetary parameters. They will also provide physical intuition that we will use to interpret subsequent 3D simulations. Our second task will be to implement CARMA as the cloud microphysical scheme in the global climate model ExoCAM, which has been used extensively to model the climates of potentially habitable exoplanets. We will then perform computationally intensive 3D simulations using ExoCAMCARMA in which we will vary the planetary parameters we have identified as most important for cloud microphysics in our 1D simulations. 3D simulations are critical because they will show how atmospheric dynamics and spatial variation in clouds interact with changes in cloud microphysics to produce emergent climate behavior. Our third task will be to determine the effect of our cloud microphysics results on different observational strategies using instrument simulator codes. 
 
This proposal is a theoretical investigation of the conditions necessary to maintain surface water on potentially habitable Earth-like exoplanets and is therefore directly relevant to the Habitable Worlds call. This work is also directly relevant to the optimal usage of JWST and the planning of LUVOIR, OST, and HabEx, which are all critical NASA missions.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Heather Allen (PI) Nicole North (FI) 
Institution:  Ohio State University  
20-PLANET20-0067, Deconvoluting the Components of Enceladus Icy Plume through Convolutional Neural Networks 
 
The plume of Enceladus, sourced from the subsurface ocean and erupting through surface fissures, could potentially contain signs of life elsewhere in our solar system. Evidence indicates the presence of a layer of organic materials at the interface of the subsurface ocean and ice shell that is being sampled by the plume. The plume was explored during the Cassini mission by the two onboard mass spectrometers: the Ion Neutral Mass Spectrometer (INMS) and the Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA). The difficulty in the full utilization of the INMS and CDA databases largely arises from the low mass cutoff and the low mass resolution (m/”m of 100 for the INMS and m/”m of 20-50 for the CDA) of these instruments. To get the most out of the INMS and the CDA data in this work I propose utilizing a custom Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), a machine learning based approach, to further our understanding of the organics that are being sampled from the subsurface ocean of Enceladus. This will be done through identifying organic functional groups present in the ice grains that make up the plume. A CNN will be trained on mass spectrometry data from the NIST database. This will be used to identify functional groups from withheld mass spectra of the NIST database as a proof of concept. Then the NIST mass spectra will have a mass cutoff placed and noise will be added to allow the NIST data to better emulate the INMS and the CDA data. Surface based thermodynamic and spectroscopic measurements will also be taken to create statistical filters. These statistical filters will allow the model to reflect what we understand about aqueous surface dynamics. The resulting model will be used to confirm organic molecule assessments that other groups have made as well as revealing new functional groups previously unidentified at Enceladus. The proposed work will broaden the impact of future missions with lower resolution instrumentation and enhance the science return of previous MS-based missions.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Don Banfield (PI) Carly Snell (FI) 
Institution:  Cornell University  
20-PLANET20-0135, Water Transport on Mars: Current and Future Observations 
 
Water vapor transport in the Martian atmosphere is an important process with implications for climate, habitability, and human exploration. However, despite significant progress in observing, characterizing, and modelling the Mars atmosphere and water cycle, water transport is not yet well understood. Existing observations of water vapor on Mars have good spatiotemporal coverage but are mainly column-integrated. Vertically resolved water vapor measurements, which are essential to developing a more complete understanding and quantification of water transport, are quite sparse, so the best estimates of water vapor transport come from GCMs and GCM reanalyses. Another vital component for quantifying water transport, vertically resolved direct wind measurements, are nearly nonexistent, so winds must be estimated from temperatures instead. We propose here two approaches for improving our understanding of Mars water vapor transport, one using existing data and another aiming to optimize future instruments that will provide significantly better observations. For the analysis of existing data, we will perform wave analysis on MGS Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) temperature and water vapor column abundance measurements. From this, the meridional water vapor transport as a result of atmospheric waves can be determined, which has been shown by models to be a significant component of the overall water vapor transport. Additionally, the same procedure will be carried out on EMARS data, which comes from a GCM reanalysis using assimilated TES temperature data, to generate another estimate of the wave-induced water vapor transport. This will also allow us to compare with previous reanalysis results to assess the influence of model bias. Looking to the future, we will also investigate a sub-mm sounder that is under development at JPL that will provide the vertically resolved water vapor abundances and direct wind measurements that are greatly needed, not only for water vapor transport, but also for waterregolith interactions, large-scale circulation, and wave activity. To assess the science return (with respect to water vapor transport) of such an instrument and to further optimize it, we will use Observation Simulation System Experiment (OSSE) techniques to examine a variety of instrument design trades (e.g. different antenna orientations, scanning speeds, orbits). We expect this approach to not only improve this particular instrument, but also establish a foundation by which other future instruments can be optimized and validated to yield the best possible information against their science goals. Overall, by quantifying the wave-induced water transport on Mars using TES data and validating and optimizing an instrument that will drastically increase our understanding of Mars water transport and atmosphere as a whole, this proposed work addresses multiple goals set by the Planetary Science Research Program and research supported by the Planetary Research Program. Most importantly, this work 1) helps increase our understanding of processes that occur in the solar system; in this case Mars water vapor transport, but wave-induced transport is also a fundamental process occurring on bodies throughout the solar system; 2) helps constrain past and present climate and water quantity/location, which provides insight into possible ancient or even contemporary habitable environments on Mars and the possibility of extant life beyond the Earth; and 3) enhances spacecraft-based technology for future planetary missions through the optimization of our submm sounder and other future instruments that may use the OSSE methodology we validate here.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Paul Bracher (PI) Steven Skaggs (FI) 
Institution:  Saint Louis University  
20-PLANET20-0225, Organic Deliquescence and Chemical Evolution on Hydrocarbon Worlds 
 
This proposal outlines a research plan to investigate the potential importance of organic humidity to the development of chemical complexity on hydrocarbon worlds like Saturns moon Titan. The major aims of our research include to: (i) establish a method to control humidity of hydrocarbon solvents in closed systems using dissolved fatty acids and nitriles as humidistats, (ii) measure the affinity of organic compounds to acquire and retain organic vapor from the atmosphere in a process that is hypothetically analogous to deliquescence with water vapor on Earth, and (iii) investigate the ability of deliquescent organic substances to serve as media for hosting polymerization reactions that build complexity from smaller organic building blocks. 
 
We will use hexane and similar hydrocarbon solvents that are liquids at room temperature on 
Earth as convenient and safer alternatives for methane, which is a liquid on the cold surface of Titan. We describe the construction of a closed system for controlling solvent vapor pressure fitted with a gas cell that permits FT-IR spectroscopy to be used to measure the vapor pressure of solvent inside the chamber's atmosphere. Once we have established our ability to control solvent vapor pressure, we will test whether organic compounds can exhibit deliquescence---dissolving completely in solvent acquired as vapor from the atmosphere---in the same way that salts are deliquescent on aqueous worlds. We will then study how molecular structure (size, polarity, functional groups, branching, etc.) of various organic compounds affects the deliquescence of the compounds, as measured by the threshold/critical deliquescence humidity (the solvent humidity required for a given compound to be deliquescent). 
 
Finally, we will attempt to extend our use of variations in water humidity and deliquescence to drive the polymerization of amino acids in peptides under prebiotic conditions to an analogous system, where organic polymerization could take place from small organic building blocks in a deliquescent droplet/protocell formed from organic solvent rather than water. We believe the results of these experiments will collectively improve our scientific understanding of deliquescence through looking beyond water, and the results will be relevant to NASA Exobiology program goals regarding possible alternatives for the origin of life. Our results may also help inform NASA's investigations of Saturn's moon Titan, a hydrocarbon world in our own solar system.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Devon Burr (PI) Natalie Jones (FI) 
Institution:  Northern Arizona University  
20-PLANET20-0233, Quantifying physical biosignatures: estimating the effect of EPS on fluvial sediment transport processes 
 
For decades, meandering rivers were thought to only exist in the presence of vegetation. However, the discovery of sinuous ridges on Mars containing fluvial-meander-like channel deposits inspired closer examination of active Earth channels. In fact, many active meandering rivers exist on Earth in the absent vegetation. To have a highly sinuous meandering geometry, these unvegetated rivers must have cohesive forces stabilizing their bank sediments. Previous studies have concluded that the abundance of cohesive clay is the most likely component stabilizing unvegetated streams on Earth. However, studies of biostabilization have demonstrated that extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), sticky compounds excreted by common microorganisms, play an important role in sediment stability and transport processes. When added to sediment, EPS can reduce erosion, increase flocculation of fine particles, and even alter the equilibrium morphology of bedforms. This proposal aims to quantify the effects of EPS in sediment over a range of grain sizes that havent been evaluated in previous literature. This proposal also builds upon previous field work conducted at Mars Analogue freshwater streams to evaluate the extent and concentration of EPS throughout the sediment profile. Lastly, these laboratory and field data will be used to numerically model the ability of EPS to stabilize meandering river channels under various Earth and Mars equivalent conditions. This research fills critical data gaps between the fields of quantitative sediment transport, geomicrobiology, and planetary science, to better evaluate the fluvial histories of Earth and Mars. 
 
Hypothesis: Microbially-produced extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) contributes to the stability of unvegetated meandering stream channels on Earth and could have contributed to the formation of meandering stream channels on Mars if microbial organisms were present on Mars during channel formation.  
 
Impact: The proposed experiment will expand new frontiers for geomorphological astrobiology research through laboratory experiments, field data collection, and meta-analysis of previous experiments. Completion of this project will:  
1)	Laboratory ExperimentsIdentify the effect of EPS on critical shear stress thresholds for all ripple-forming grain sizes 
2)	Field WorkAnalyze the depth distribution of EPS throughout sediments adjacent to freshwater stream channels 
3)	Numerical ModelingEvaluate the stability of meandering streams on Earth and Mars using the laboratory and field-derived parameters collected from this and previous studies in the literature  
 
Relevance of the Proposed Work to NASA Science Mission Directorate and Goals: According to the 2020-2024 Science Mission Directorate (SMD), the SMD mission is to discover the secrets of the universe. Search for life elsewhere. Protect and improve life on Earth(Nasa 2020-2024 Scientific Excellence, 2020).  This proposed research directly advances the search for life elsewhere on Earth-like surfaces. Additionally, strategy 1.3 of priority 1 of the SMD goals is to advance discovery in emerging fields by identifying and exploiting crossdisciplinary opportunities between traditional science disciplines.The proposed research directly supports this priority because it crosses disciplines of sediment transport geomorphology, geospatial analysis, biogeochemistry, and planetary science. It also falls into the two SMD categories of Planetary Science and Earth Science because it advances knowledge in both fields.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
David Catling (PI) Lucas Fifer (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Washington, Seattle  
20-PLANET20-0057, Exploring the potential for life in Enceladus’ ocean using plume chemistry and isotopes 
 
The chemical composition of plumes erupting from cracks in the icy surface of Enceladus, a moon of Saturn, offers a glimpse into the nature of a subsurface ocean. The ocean is particularly interesting to astrobiologists because the pH, salinity, temperature, and composition may be favorable for life. The chemistry of the plumes should reflect the composition of the subsurface ocean; however, a plume will be highly fractionated from the source ocean as it erupts to the surface. Our preliminary analysis of fractionation processes indicates that the ocean is much more gas-rich and isotopically heavy in carbon and hydrogen than the plume. Hence, we need a rigorous understanding of plume fractionation to determine the composition of the ocean based on analyses of the plume by the Cassini spacecraft or future missions. To address these issues, I propose to investigate various fractionation mechanisms at work in the Enceladus ocean-plume system by: (1) experimentally measuring chemical and D/H and C isotopic fractionation processes, (2) incorporating these measurements into predictive models, and (3) applying these models to understand the plume and ocean chemistry. This proposal would result in a greater understanding of Enceladusocean chemistry: its evolution over time, its potential habitability, and possible biosignatures. 
 
This proposal is relevant to the goal of the Planetary Science Division and Planetary Science Research Program of NASAs Science Mission Directorate (SMD), to advance the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in our solar system operate, interact and evolve.The proposed work meets this goal by investigating Enceladus physical and chemical processes through experiments and models. This work is also relevant to the SMD goal to explore and observe the objects in the solar system to understand how they formed and evolve because it will constrain the evolving ocean composition due to plume activity. The proposed work is also relevant to the SMD goal to explore and find locations where life could have existed or could exist todaybecause it investigates possible biosignatures. This proposal is relevant to the NASA Science Plans Priority 1: Exploration and Scientific Discovery, because it will advance our scientific understanding of Enceladus, and increase the scientific returns of future missions. 
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Vincent Chevrier (PI) Jill Sandtorf-McDonald (FI) 
Institution:  University of Arkansas, Fayetteville  
20-PLANET20-0194, Laboratory study of clathrate formation and stability at relevant protosolar nebula conditions 
 
Our project intends to explore the formation of clathrate hydrates at low pressures. Clathrate hydrates are ordered mixtures of water ice and a guest gas, in which the gas molecules are trapped inside a lattice of water molecules. Clathrates likely exist throughout the solar system, though their presence apart from Earth has not been proven, since there has been no equipment deployed which can detect these materials. If clathrates formed during the early stages of the solar system, they would have had a large impact on the amount of volatile gases incorporated into bodies such as planets, comets, and Kuiper Belt Objects.   
 
We will use the Outer Solar System Simulation Chamber to create clathrate hydrates from water ice and guest gas. This chamber can recreate the low pressure, low temperature conditions which correspond the those in the early stages of the solar system. We designed and built a clathrate observation cell, which will allow for close monitoring of pressure and temperature conditions close to the water/gas mixture.  
 
We will explore two separate pathways for clathrate formation. The first pathway will examine how a mixture of water vapor and guest gas behaves in protosolar nebula conditions. The second pathway will determine how guest gas interacts with amorphous water ice in those same conditions. We will characterize different molar ratios of water to guest gas, and a range of temperature from 12 K to 100 K will be explored. Each mixture will be examined optically and spectrally, using FTIR and Raman spectroscopy to distinguish clathrate hydrates from intimate mixtures of ice and gas.   
 
This work is beneficial to NASA and the planetary science community because it will extend our understanding of clathrate hydrate behavior.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Andrew Connolly (PI) Hayden Smotherman (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Washington, Seattle  
20-PLANET20-0017, Searching below the noise: proposed advances for detecting faint Solar System objects 
 
Small bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune hold the key to discovering the dynamical evolution and history of our Solar System. This is especially true for bodies that are too faint to be detected with current technologies. Studying these populations directly addresses the NASA science mission directorate (SMD) objective of "Discovering the Secrets of the Universe", as detailed in the Planetary Science section of the NASA Science Plan, by "explor[ing] and observ[ing] the objects in the Solar System to understand how they formed and evolve" and by "advanc[ing] the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in the Solar System operate, interact and evolve." 
 
Astronomy today has reached the point where having enough data is no longer the problem. Rather, we are more often limited by the tools we need to analyze the data we have. This is as true in Solar System astronomy as it is elsewhere. In order to achieve the greatest scientific impact for the lowest cost, it is absolutely imperative that we research new, statistically-robust methods for analyzing upcoming next-generation data sets such as LSST, DEEP, NEOSM, and WFIRST. One such tool that is currently in development is called the Kernel-Based Moving 
Object Detection (KBMOD) algorithm. This prototype software uses a Bayesian framework with GPU-accelerated computing to search about ten billion possible Trans-Neptunian Object (TNO) trajectories across stacks of ~10-100 images for moving objects that are too faint to be detected in a single image. It does this in under a minute, using a single GPU. To accomplish this, KBMOD takes a stack of science images with the same RA and DEC and creates pre-convolved likelihood images that represent the probability of a PSF at a given pixel location. KBMOD then uses a track-before-detect search strategy to sum the log-likelihoods along a finely-sampled grid of potential TNO trajectories. Searches with a summed log-likelihood below a user-defined threshold are discarded, and the remaining results are subjected to false-positive filtering. This technique allows for the rapid detection of ultra-faint moving objects that are too dim to detect in a single image. The prototype software has already been applied to the High Cadence Transient Survey (HiTS), where it detected 39 new TNOs and recovered all 6 previously-known TNOs in the survey footprint. Further developments have allowed the software to discover an additional 75 new TNOs, and recover 22 previously-known TNOs from a small subset of the DECam NEO survey. 
 
The early results from the HiTS and DECam NEO survey data show that KBMOD has the potential to find previously-undiscovered moving objects in any given data set with repeated 
 
visits. As described in the proposal project description, KBMOD could increase the number of TNOs detected with the upcoming Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) by an order of magnitude, from 40,000 projected TNO discoveries to up to 520,000. However, this software and its potential for detecting moving sources is not limited to LSST or just TNOs, but could be applicable to any wide-field survey with repeated visits. With this proposal, I will address the three main challenges that must still be resolved in order to apply KBMOD to next-generation deep imaging surveys and to extend KBMOD to the detection of Main Belt asteroids and Trojans. First, search strategies must be optimized to allow searches for faster moving objects across longer time baselines. Second, sources must be tracked across multiple CCDs and fields in order to increase the velocity ranges and time baselines of searches. Finally, KBMOD must be able to search for objects with non-linear tracks in order to order to increase the search window from days to months. In this proposal, I describe my approach for addressing these challenges and how they will enable KBMOD to recover potentially tens of thousands of new moving objects from existing and upcoming surveys.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Mary Droser (PI) Rachel Surprenant (FI) 
Institution:  University Of California, Riverside  
20-PLANET20-0015, Leveraging regional and global records of Ediacaran tubular taxa to pinpoint the nature and dynamics of metazoan success at the dawn of animal life 
 
Fossils of the Ediacara biota (574-541 Ma) mark the critical evolutionary transition from a biosphere defined by single cellular organisms to a biosphere dominated by complex, community forming animals. Therefore, the Ediacaran fossil record houses evidence of the biological traits that allowed for this important transition to occur and provides the data necessary to enhance our understanding of the origins and evolution of complex life in the Universe. To pinpoint these critical biological characters, we can utilize patterns in the form, inferred function, abundance, and taxonomic diversity of Ediacaran morphotypes. While the majority of Ediacaran morphotypes are well-understood within this context, they provide little insight into successful experimentation in early complex life because they are characterized by low taxonomic diversity, low global abundance, and extinction within the bounds of the Ediacaran Period. The tubular morphotype is the most abundant morphotype preserved in Ediacaran localities globally and it represents the one group that persisted into the early Cambrian while all other Ediacaran forms disappearedreflecting the first mass extinction of complex organisms on Earth.  
These characters of Ediacaran tubular organisms reveal that upon the transition from singlecellular to multicellular organisms, a tubular form was the most popular and long-lived solution to complex life. This informs the hypothesis of this research project: the Ediacaran tubular morphotype represents a polyphyletic grouping of organisms that reveal a pattern of both repeated convergence in body shape and persistence of select tubular taxa in the face of dynamic environmental and ecological conditions at the dawn of animal life. My ability to test this hypothesis is, however, precluded by an incomplete understanding of the tubular morphotype, which currently has no well-established defining features, an incomplete taxonomy, and no baseline constraints on phylogeny, biology, or ecology. To collect the baseline data required to test my hypothesis, I propose a two-part study consisting of: 1) The development of a Global 
Ediacaran Tube Database comprised of all published Ediacaran tubes with associated environmental, taphonomic, ecological, and morphological data; and 2) Fieldwork in two representative Ediacaran localities: the Ediacara Member of South Australia and the Nama Group of Namibia to collect size data and paleoenvironmental occurrence data from taphonomically similar tubes, as well as to identify novel tubes to complete a majority of tube taxonomy. Results will include size measurements, novel taxonomic identifications, paleogeographic and temporal distribution data contextualized by global paleoenvironmental and taphonomic associations, and defining characters of the tubular morphotype identified via RMode cluster analysis. This information will enable me to propose a formal definition of the tubular morphotype, to define paleobiological characters that unite them, and to test my primary hypothesis on the common convergence and persistence of Ediacaran tubes.  
This project will pinpoint the nature of tube success in early complex ecosystems as well as provide a universally applicable definition of tubes and novel taxonomic data that will be able to be used by paleontologists, evolutionary biologists, and astrobiologists to further develop our understanding of the evolution of life on Earth. As such, this project will contribute to and will enable future contributions to the Planetary Science Programs goal of developing our understanding of the origins and evolution of life in the Universe. Furthermore, through the definition of the occurrence and diversity patterns of the most abundant Ediacaran morphogroup across the first mass extinction of complex life on Earth, this project will address the ROSES Exobiology goal, an element of the Planetary Science Research Program, of developing our understanding of mass extinctions.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Christopher Edwards (PI) Christian Tai Udovicic (FI) 
Institution:  Northern Arizona University  
20-PLANET20-0209, Constraining the Lunar Space Weathering Rate with Remote Sensing 
 
In this investigation, I will constrain the lunar space weathering rate and the processes that dominate its formation using several published remote sensing data products. I will map the primary ejecta of several dated lunar craters and determine the nanophase iron, microphase iron and mineral iron (FeO) content within each (Trang and Lucey, 2019; Lemelin et al., 2016). Using the age of each crater, I will present trends in the surface accumulation rates of nanophase and microphase iron broadly on the lunar surface. I will test the influence that local FeO content has on the rate of nanophase and microphase iron production and compare results to empirical constraints in Apollo soil samples. I will also test if the solar wind has a significant effect on the observed space weathering rate by investigating nanophase and microphase iron as a function of latitude and near magnetic anomalies (lunar swirls), contributing to the core question of whether solar wind irradiation or micrometeorite bombardment dominates space weathering at 1 AU. Furthermore, I will use the space weathering products expressed on the surface to test the influence of regolith mixing by impact gardening. Investigating crater ejecta of varying thicknesses will provide remote constraints of the depth-dependent influence of impact gardening at a greater scale than currently available. Through a rigorous analysis of the properties (in-situ iron content) and processes (solar wind irradiation, micrometeorite bombardment, and impact gardening) that affect the observed lunar space weathering rate, this investigation takes a multi-faceted approach to advancing our understanding of how airless planetary surfaces interact with the space environment. This work will provide remote constrains for space weathering analyses of on-going and planned lunar missions and sample return, the sample analyses of asteroids near 1 AU (e.g., Bennu and Ryugu), and will advance the core Planetary Science Division goal to understand how chemical and physical processes operate, interact and evolve.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Christine Foreman (PI) Madeline Garner (FI) 
Institution:  Montana State University, Bozeman  
20-PLANET20-0098, Testing Solid-State Nanopore Technology for Detecting DNA and RNA in Laboratory and Field Experiments: Icy World Analogs 
 
The evidence of water on the moons Jupiter and Saturn have brought a new focus to lifedetection instruments. The moons Europa and Enceladus offer the opportunity for researchers to examine fresh samples for biosignature detection. One potential biosignature is DNA, RNA, or other polyelectrolytes. The solid-state nanopore offers a space flight adaptable technology for the detection of these biomolecules. This work proposes the testing of the solid-state nanopore technology for the detection of » DNA and RNA in analog conditions of Europa and Enceladus. The aim of this work is to 1) maximize the solid-state nanopores ability to maintain a stable baseline in simulated seawater at extreme pH values, 2) examine the chips capability to detect and differentiate » DNA and RNA in these conditions, and 3) assess the nanopores ability to perform in-situ investigations of planetary field site analogs. This tool offers promising applications for detecting a wide range of biosignatures. This research will examine the solidstate nanopores applicability for current and future Astrobiological investigations.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Timothy Goudge (PI) Emily Bamber (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Texas, Austin  
20-PLANET20-0072, Exploring Controls on the Lack of Valley Network-Fed Crater Lakes on Early Mars 
 
Ancient crater-hosted lakes on Mars provide a detailed record of  past environmental conditions and are considered prime targets in NASAs search for life. The geomorphology of Mars suggests the oldest surface was shaped by impact cratering and widespread landscape erosion. Some time later on early Mars, an era of intense water activity resulted in formation of long, deeply incised valley networks and a number of valley network-fed lakes. A preliminary study by the FI suggests the early, widespread erosion of crater rims on early Mars may have primed craters for subsequent inlet incision and transformation into these valley network-fed lakes. However, not all rimless craters on Mars are breached by an inlet. Here, we ask: Why werent all of early Mars degraded, rimless craters breached by the end of the valley network-forming era?  
 
The work outlined in this proposal will address two primary science questions: (Q1) What distinct geomorphic features define degraded crater basins that were breached by valley networks versus those that are not?; and (Q2) What are the threshold environmental conditions, e.g., climate aridity, that limit or promote whether a basin develops an inlet valley or not? Each question will be addressed with one task.  
 
Task 1 will address Q1 and constrain controls on early Marslandscape integration through evaluating similarities and differences in topography and hydrology around 30 degraded craters with (n=15) and without (n=15) inlet valleys, selected from published catalogs. Measurements will include regional slope, drainage density, and topographic roughness of the rim and the exterior terrain. We will use High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) and Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA) topography, Context Camera (CTX) images, and the Thermal Emission 
Imaging System (THEMIS) global daytime infrared mosaic, all publicly available from the Planetary Data System (PDS). We will also derive topography from CTX stereo-pair images using the NASA Ames Stereo Pipeline. Differences in the range of morphometry values measured around breached and non-breached craters will constrain the threshold(s) for landscape integration for the early martian surface. 
 
Task 2 will answer Q2 through combining morphometry measured in Task 1 with a numerical landscape evolution model. This task will constrain how environmental conditions (regional slope, topographic roughness) and climate (aridity) affect landscape evolution, and inlet valley formation and morphology. Results from this task will also provide the first climate constraints specific to crater paleolake inlet formation on early Mars. Overall this work will determine the combination of processes and geologic boundary conditions that reproduce (or cannot reproduce) breaches into degraded craters, and the relative significance of different factors. 
 
The proposed work will improve our understanding of crater lake inlet formation mechanisms and the environmental conditions that controlled their evolution. Task 1 will provide a survey of new observational constraints on how degraded martian craters became lakes. Task 2 will utilise the new observations as parameters in a landscape evolution model, to constrain climate conditions during inlet valley formation. The results of this study will improve our understanding of early martian hydrology, climate, and fluvial activity, with implications for early Marssurface habitability.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Masatoshi Hirabayashi (PI) Ryota Nakano (FI) 
Institution:  Auburn University  
20-PLANET20-0016, BYORPs Nightmare Induced by Geophysical and Dynamical Properties of Binary Asteroids Revealed by FEM Approach 
 
We wish to explore the following science problem (SP): How do the geophysical and dynamical properties of a binary asteroid system control the Binary Yarkovsky-OKeefe-RadzievskiiPaddack (BYORP) effect? To explore the defined SP, we characterize the mutual dynamics of binary asteroid 1999 KW4 and quantify how the BYORP effect depends on its geophysical and dynamical properties, via finite element modeling (FEM) approaches. The planned FEM approaches will account for the complex mutual dynamics and thermophysical evolution to accurately determine the BYORP coefficient, which represents the strength of the BYORP effect.  
 
Characterizations of BYORP on 1999 KW4 will provide the following scientific significances: Filling a knowledge gap of BYORP acting on binary asteroid 1999 KW4: Regardless of earlier efforts, theoretical predictions and observational studies have not yet provided consistent results. BYORP acting on 1999 KW4 was predicted to induce an orbital drift of 7 cm/year. However, recent observations revealed 1.2 cm/year. 
The gained knowledge is applicable to binary asteroid systems in Near-Earth Asteroids (NEAs): ~16% of NEAs are considered to be binary asteroid systems, and many of these systems are considered to possess the 1999 KW4-like configurations. The findings from the proposed project will give generalized understandings of BYORP and thus deep insights into the nature of similar binary asteroid systems in NEAs. 
 
The following two mechanisms (MEs) are critical but have not been well constrained.  ME. 1. Mutual orbits and spins. Even small rotational perturbation from the synchronous mode, or libration, may cause non-negligible BYORP, which has not been well explored.  ME. 2. Shapes and surface conditions. Shapes are not perfectly axisymmetric, adding the influence of local topography on the net thermal imbalance. Also, surface conditions such as the thermal inertia and surface roughness strongly contribute to the variations in solar radiation. 
 
The proposed project defines four tasks to constrain how MEs contribute to BYORP on 1999 KW4.  
Task 1. Combine a mutual dynamics model and a thermophysical model to robustly determine the BYORP coefficient.  
Task 2. (ME.1) Parameterize the mutual orbits and spins. 
Task 3. (ME.2) Parameterize the shapes and surface conditions. 
Task 4. Constrain BYORP leading to 1999 KW4s observed orbit drift. 
 
The BYORP coefficient, B, is a scalar value that characterizes the semimajor axis evolution of the mutual orbit between the primary and the secondary. Earlier work showed that when the secondary is rotating synchronously with its orbit, this coefficient only depends on the secondarys shape configuration. We hypothesize that this is not the case when we consider detailed variations in BYORP due to MEs. 
 
Performing comprehensive parameter assessments and comparing them with the observational results, the proposed project will be the first innovative study to tightly constrain BYORP acting on 1999 KW4. We anticipate that accounting for libration (orbital and spin perturbations) and shapes and surface conditions likely yields lower B than previously predicted. This promises that our model will be able to better constrain BYORP acting on 1999 KW4. 
 
This investigation is directly relevant to the present Announcement of Opportunity (AO). Through FINESST, the Science Mission Directorate (SMD) solicits graduate student-designed and performed research projects that contribute to improving our understanding of how the objects in the Solar System formed and evolve. In NASAs 2014 Science Plan, 2007-2016 Science Plan, and 2018 Strategic Plan, the Planetary Science Division consistently defines the science goals to understand the content, origin, and evolution of the solar system. The proposed project, designed by FI Nakano, is aligned with AO and will contribute to these NASAs key goals.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Sarah Horst (PI) Michael Radke (FI) 
Institution:  Johns Hopkins University  
20-PLANET20-0181, Laboratory Investigations of Venus Aerosol Analogs 
 
Despite dozens of successful missions to Venus since the 1960s, there remain several outstanding questions regarding its global cloud layer. Of note is the nature of an unknown nearultraviolet absorbing species. This so-called unknown absorber is responsible for about one-third of the total solar heating at the cloud tops [1]. The identity of the unknown absorber(s) in the Venusian atmosphere has eluded the planetary science community since the first time Venus was observed in the ultraviolet, despite decades of attempts to understand it. Attempts to identify the unknown absorber have been stymied by a lack of laboratory measurements of the optical properties of the suggested absorbers. Here we propose to remedy that problem through the measurement optical constants for a number of proposed species, thus allowing the Venus community to either finally identify the unknown UV absorber(s) or rule out proposed candidates that have lingered in the literature for decades. 
This work contributes to the goals of NASAs Planetary Science Division by advancing the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in the Solar System operate, interact and evolveas described in Chapter 4.3 of the SMD 2014 Science Plan.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Joel Hurowitz (PI) Victoria Rivera Banuchi (FI) 
Institution:  State University Of New York, Stony Brook  
20-PLANET20-0094, Experimental constraints on ultraviolet-light driven iron oxidation processes on early Mars 
 
Mars was likely habitable in its early history in which liquid water formed an important part of surface environments. Due to the lack of plate tectonics, Mars provides an opportunity to study a ~4 Gyr system that would have been affected by early planetary processes that, in turn, would have affected the conditions that determined habitability. A minimally researched process that would have affected aqueous conditions, prebiotic chemistry, and mineral pathways is ultraviolet (UV) photooxidation of ferrous iron. UV photons can photooxidize Fe(II) to Fe(III) in its aqueous form as well as in mineral phases. This, in turn, will affect the chemical conditions of the medium in which it is occurring. This project aims to investigate that process under DIC (dissolved inorganic carbon) rich conditions as an experimental analog to early Martian environments (e.g., lacustrine environments). Firstly, UV irradiation experiments of Fe2+ solutions in the presence of DIC, chlorine, and sulphate will be conducted to observe the chemical changes and phases precipitated. Preliminary results from these experiments have revealed potentially two mineralization pathways that these systems may follow based on the initial pH and iron speciation. In one pathway, we observed the precipitation of ferric iron hydroxides with the system evolving towards lower pH conditions. The other pathway produces mixed valence iron minerals, and the system evolves towards a pH of ~9.5. These differences could be used to understand the role that UV radiation had in the formation of the deposits we observe on Mars today. Magnetite, for example, is produced with solutions that have a starting pH above 6.0 and it has been identified within Gale Crater mudstones. The next steps of this project will involve conducting these UV photooxidation experiments with pH buffered solutions to understand the rate of iron removal with this process in surficial early Martian water bodies. As this project progresses, we are aiming to add more components to our chemical systems, specifically Mars-relevant trace metals such as nickel, zinc, copper, and manganese. Our objective is to determine how these will behavior under UV irradiation in the same chemical conditions. These metals were chosen as these are present in the Martian record and they could have been participants in the origin of life on Earth. Understanding the fate of these metals will allow us to determine whether these could have been available for early life in a surface water body on Mars. Finally, this project aims to first identify if organic molecules are produced from these UV processes and then characterize the type and the conditions in which these are proliferated. This research is significant and relevant to the NASA Planetary Division because it may provide an additional process by which iron minerals were produced in early Mars. We are examining the role of UV light on the mineral record to later determine the prospect of prebiotic chemical processes within Martian surface water bodies. Any remnants left behind by these processes could then be observed with Mars rovers or in future sample return missions and will allow us to better understand prebiotic chemistry in early Mars. Understanding potential prebiotic chemistry on Mars will ultimately aid in our understanding of the origin of life on Earth; if we can identify proto life remnants on Mars, would these be consistent with those expected on Earth? Moreover, if life never developed on Mars, the different path from Earth may allow us to better specify the conditions that facilitated the origin of life on Earth.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Daniel Jones (PI) Zoe Havlena (FI) 
Institution:  New Mexico Institute Of Mining And Technology  
20-PLANET20-0188, Interpreting acidic gypsum deposits as hosts for past and present microbial life 
 
Gypsum (CaSO4"2H2O) is a hydrated sulfate mineral that is prevalent on the surface of Mars and is considered a possible target for the detection of past or present Martian life. Martian gypsum deposits are thought to have formed under highly acidic evaporative conditions. Acidic gypsum also occurs on Earths surface, and these environments have been the target of numerous astrobiology studies because of their similarity to Martian evaporites and their capacity to host diverse microbial communities. 
 
However, gypsum-associated extremophiles are also found in another area of Earth: caves that form by sulfuric acid speleogenesis(SAS). Gypsum precipitates extensively in these caves where communities of acidophilic sulfide-oxidizing microorganisms directly catalyze the formation of sulfate minerals. Unlike surface evaporites, these cave deposits have no photosynthetic influence, and the microbial communities associated with them are based on chemolithoautotrophy. SAS caves therefore offer an unexplored setting for evaluating chemosynthetic microbial communities and the potential for biosignature preservation in acidic gypsum. However, we dont yet know whether and how microorganisms use gypsum as a habitat in these systems, or how faithfully cave gypsum deposits preserve signatures of the life that was present during their formation. 
 
In order to take advantage of these unique systems, we propose to combine molecular geomicrobiology, organic geochemistry, and mineralogy to address the following questions: 
1.	What microbial processes are occurring in actively forming cave gypsum? 
2.	Is there a characteristic lipid biosignature suite associated with active microbial communities in these fresh deposits?  
3.	Do (and how do) microbes continue to use gypsum as a habitat as the deposits age? 
4.	Do ancient gypsum deposits preserve organic and microfossil evidence for microbial processes? 
 
We will address these questions by applying culture-independent analyses (amplicon sequencing, metagenomics, and metatranscriptomics; Q1 and Q3), organic geochemistry (Q2 and Q4), and mineralogy and petrology (Q1-4) to actively forming and aging gypsum deposits in four cave systems. These systems contain a time series of gypsum deposits up to 10 million years old, including one cave in which gypsum formation suddenly ceased three years ago and represents a unique opportunity to examine the microbial shifts that follow. 
 
If we find that biomarkers sourced from chemolithotrophic microorganisms are preserved in acidic gypsum for millions of years, that would indicate that gypsum is indeed a suitable target for future detection of extinct or extant life on Mars. The NASA Astrobiology Strategy identifies these kinds of subsurface communities as key models for rock-hosted, chemosynthetic life that may exist on other worlds. This research will help inform future rover-based exploration of the Martian surface, both in terms of organic, mineralogical, and textural features that would be suitable targets for detailed analysis as well as the instrumentation that would be most valuable for life detection missions that target these evaporites. The subsurface SAS cave environment is a natural laboratory for examining an ecosystem supported exclusively by chemosynthesis of extremophilic microbes, and this proposal directly addresses the Planetary Science research goal to understand the phylogeny and physiology of microorganisms, including extremophiles, whose characteristics may reflect the nature of primitive environments(ROSES-2020 solicitation C.5-2). The new insights gained from this proposal will transform our understanding of how life uses acidic gypsum on Earth, and may do so on other worlds.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Stephen Kane (PI) Michelle Hill (FI) 
Institution:  University Of California, Riverside  
20-PLANET20-0106, Exploring the Lower Planet Size Boundary of Planetary Habitability 
 
While the abundance of planet discoveries outside our solar system has been a huge benefit to the study of exoplanets, it has caused an extra problem in the search for habitable planets: Of the many targets in the habitable zone (HZ) of their star, which are the best candidates to observe to try and detect signs of life? With limited resources for follow-up observations it is important to find ways to refine the list of potentially habitable planets to those that are the most likely to be habitable. This project aims to help refine this list by exploring the lower planet mass and radius limit of habitability. While many studies have attempted to determine the size at which a rocky planet will become a gas giant, few have investigated the lower size boundary of potentially habitable terrestrial planets. How small can a planet be and still maintain liquid surface water? What surface pressure is needed to maintain sufficient atmospheric volatiles so that liquid water can exist on the surface of the planet? At what size does the cooling of a planet's interior reduce its magnetic field so it can no longer effectively protect its atmosphere from solar winds? And when will the cooling of the interior of a planet reduce the tectonic plate motion to a point where carbon cycling is no longer sufficient? We start by extracting existing scaling laws from the literature and developing them for smaller than Earth, or sub-Earthsized planets to determine what we can expect when planet size is reduced below that of Earth. These scaling laws include expected changes in a planets interior composition, atmospheric composition, surface pressure, atmosphere escape, core and mantle cooling, lithosphere thickness and subsequent tectonic plate immobility. These scaling laws will be developed into a 1D model called STEHM, the Smaller Than Earth Habitability Model. STEHM is based on existing code adopted from Dr Brad Foley and will be used to visualize what changes a reduction in planet size has on each factor. Our model will work in conjunction with and be tested against existing exoplanet modeling tool VPLanet. VPLanet is a 1D model that includes modules that simulate atmospheric loss, interior thermal evolution, and the climate of planets. Using VPLanet in conjunction with our model, the internal and external processes of Earth that are thought to be essential to maintaining habitable conditions will be explored for sub-Earth sized planets. These simulation results will then be tested against real sub-Earth sized Solar System objects, Venus and Mars, and compared with observations of extra-solar sub-Earth sized planets such as the Trappist-1 HZ planets. In addition to testing scaling laws that will be useful to a broad range of terrestrial planets, from these results the potential habitability of sub-Earth sized planets will be examined and conditional limitations defined. There have already been many potentially habitable terrestrial planets discovered in the HZ of their star and studies have shown that the number of planets per star increases to smaller planet sizes, so there are likely many more sub-Earth sized planets in the HZ awaiting detection. Both current and future NASA and ESA missions such as TESS and PLATO will only increase the pool of candidates even further. By refining the pool of HZ planets to only the most promising this project will help to achieve NASA SMD strategic objective 1.12: ``To search for life ... and answer the question: are we alone? And to enable prioritization of exoplanets for targeted follow-up observations", and will help future telescope missions such as LUVOIR and HabEx by facilitating the best possible target selection.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Paul Lucey (PI) Abigail Flom (FI) 
Institution:  University of Hawaii, Honolulu  
20-PLANET20-0158, Infrared Photometric Properties of Lunar Soils 
 
The proposed research would seek to better understand the photometric properties of lunar materials in the near-to-mid-infrared wavelength region, with the end goal of being able to derive more-reliable estimates of lunar surface hydration from remote sensing spectra. This would be achieved by using laboratory measurements of lunar materials of different compositions to derive empirical functions that describe the reflectance of these materials as a function of incidence, emission, and phase angles. The functions derived would then be applied to ground-based observational data.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
David Mitchell (PI) Murti Nauth (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Berkeley  
20-PLANET20-0147, Determining the Spatial Distribution and Characteristics of Suprathermal Electrons in the Martian Wake 
 
A planet's interactions with its host star can determine its evolutionary path. One such interaction is how the plasma environment responds to the stars dynamic radiation and magnetic field.  Mars does not possess an intrinsic magnetosphere, and the sun's magnetic fields drape about the planet, creating an induced magnetosphere. Behind the planet, a flared "tail" forms from this interaction. Plasma in this magnetotail can undergo various processes there, such as acceleration and precipitation onto the planet's nightside atmosphere. These processes play an important role in the formation of the nightside ionosphere at Mars because electron precipitation is the leading source of energy deposition to it. The coupling between the sun's magnetic field and Mars' magnetotail can teach us about how the sun and Mars interact. In this study, we will utilize data collected by the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) spacecraft to investigate the distribution of, and acceleration processes that have acted upon, accelerated, energized (suprathermal) electrons, within this magnetotail region. 
 
The proposed three-year study will address the following science objectives:  
Objective 1: Determine the statistical characteristics of suprathermal electron acceleration in the Martian wake. 
Objective 2: Map accelerated electrons in the magnetotail and determine the correlation between various measured parameters and their potential drivers. 
Objective 3: Determine the importance of accelerated electrons on the nightside ionosphere structure. 
 
In addressing these objectives, we will answer the following questions: 
Under what conditions and to what spatial extent, does suprathermal electron acceleration occur at Mars?  
 
How sensitive is this acceleration to the upstream solar wind? What role do the crustal magnetic fields and their relation to magnetic reconnection play in these processes?  
 
How important is accelerated electron precipitation to the total energy flux maintaining the nightside ionosphere?  
 
We will map suprathermal electron distributions in the magnetotail to probe these processes and their relevance in the energy inflow and outflow of the Martian atmosphere. 
 
Our study will use data analysis techniques to address our science objectives through a combination of case study and statistical analysis. The dataset used in this study will be accessed through NASA's Planetary Data System and will contain in-situ measurements from the MAVEN spacecraft's particles and fields package. This includes time series data from the Solar Wind Electron Analyzer (SWEA), Magnetometer (MAG), Solar Wind Ion Analyzer (SWIA), and Suprathermal and Thermal Ion Composition (STATIC), and Neutral Gas and Ion Mass Spectrometer (NGIMS) instruments from 2015-2019. 
 
Relevance: 
Our study will contribute to NASA's Science Mission Directorate goal of understanding the history of Mars and the formation of the solar system. Study of the Martian magnetotail provides insight towards plasma acceleration in the magnetotails of Earth and unmagnetized bodies (such as Venus, Titan, and exoplanets). This also addresses the "workings of the solar system" theme of the 2013-2022 Planetary Science Decadal Survey. Our investigation of how the connection between Mars' magnetotail and the solar wind leads to plasma acceleration also contributes towards a "...detailed understanding of the physical and chemical properties and processes that shape planetary interiors, surfaces, atmospheres, rings, and magnetospheres."  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Megan Newcombe (PI) Liam Peterson (FI) 
Institution:  University of Maryland, College Park  
20-PLANET20-0202, Volatile Sourcing and Retention in the Early Solar System: the Ureilite Parent Body 
 
This proposal aims to constrain the volatile (i.e. H2O, C, F, Cl, S) and moderately volatile element (i.e. P, Mn, Li, Cu, K, Na; MVE) content, and hydrogen isotopic characteristics of the Ureilites, a group of meteorites thought to be derived from a single, early-formed, differentiated parent body, and identified as a terrestrial (inner solar system) isotopic end-member. The measured volatile and moderately volatile element concentrations will be used to constrain the bulk volatile content of the Ureilite Parent Body (UPB), which will then be compared to other early-formed parent bodies (e.g., Eucrites and Angrites). Additionally, volatile and moderately volatile element contents will be compared with chemical, isotopic, and petrographic indicators of parent body processes, such as metamorphism and aqueous alteration. H isotopes, volatile element ratios (F/H, Cl/H, C/H), and MVE depletion trends will be used to constrain potential sources (i.e. comets, chondrites, nebular gas) of volatiles to the UPB and ultimately to the inner solar system. 
We propose to measure volatiles and MVEs in phosphates, melt inclusions, and nominally anhydrous minerals in a suite of seven Ureilite meteorites spanning a range of UPB mantle compositions (as represented by olivine core Mg#) and the UPB feldspathic crustal lithology (ALM-A). All samples are in hand, and sample preparation is underway. Analyses of volatiles by secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) will follow existing protocols yielding instrumental background as low as 1 ppm H2O. After SIMS analysis, major and trace element concentrations will be measured by Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer and Scanning Electron Microscope. A 50 mg aliquot of each sample will be dissolved with HF, HCl, and HNO3 following existing protocol for bulk rock MVE analyses by MC-ICP-MS. 
 
The proposed work aligns with several goals outlined by the Planetary Science Research Program (PSRP) and Planetary Science Decadal Survery (PSDS). Major PSRP goals aligned with the proposed work include: 1) exploring how solar system objects form and evolve; 2) understanding processes relating to individual objects and systems that inform our understanding of fundamental processes; and 3) improving our understanding of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life in the Universe. Additionally, the PSRP and PSDS outline several goals related to constraining the primordial origin and distribution of volatiles, systematic volatile element depletions in meteorites and elemental fractionation in the solar system, the distribution of volatiles in primitive bodies, the role of nebular and accretionary processes on bulk compositions, and chemical and isotopic gradients in the solar system. The proposed work is well suited to address these goals, as it will provide measurements of the volatile content and H-isotopic characteristics of an early-formed non-carbonaceous isotopic end-member. The proposed analyses will be used to constrain potential sources of volatiles to the terrestrial planet region.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Joseph O'Rourke (PI) Kevin Trinh (FI) 
Institution:  Arizona State University  
20-PLANET20-0176, The Structural, Thermal, and Magnetic History of Europa's RockMetal Interior with Implications for Seafloor Geochemistry 
 
While the advent of NASA Galileo inspired a wave of ground-breaking research on Europa, much remains unknown about the formation and evolution of Europas deep interior. This lack of understanding challenges geophysical and geochemical investigations on the persistence of Europas habitability since deep interior processes play a role in heat and chemical energy deposited into the subsurface ocean. Existing studies typically assume that Europa possessed its metallic core immediately after accretion. However, unlike the terrestrial planets, Europa is too small to differentiate its metal-silicate interior and dehydrate its silicates solely by heat derived by gravitational energy during accretion. This assumption is problematic since core formation and silicate dehydration act as potentially important heat sinks in Europas thermal evolution. Neglecting these processes will result in unrealistically warm thermal histories. 
 
We will address four key questions: 1) When did Europa form its metallic core? 2) What are the prospects for an ancient core-hosted dynamo at Europa? 3) What are the prospects of past and present volcanic activity? and 4) What are the compositions of aqueous fluids produced by silicate dehydration and serpentinization over time? 
 
We propose investigating the role of deep interior processes on the history of Europas ocean habitability in two Tasks: 
 
1)	Model the internal differentiation and evolution of Europa. We will build a one-dimensional (radial) model of Europas structural, thermal, and magnetic evolution while incorporating key geologic processes that act as heat sinks: core formation and evolution, silicate hydration and dehydration, and if applicable, solid-state mantle convection and seafloor volcanism. (Addresses questions 1-3) 
 
2)	Model the composition of aqueous fluids produced by rock-water reactions. We use EQ3/6, an open-sourced software package for chemical kinetics and thermodynamics, to perform reaction path calculations. Using the temperature and pressure conditions set by Task 1, we determine mineral assemblages and extent of redox reactions (e.g. H2 and O2 production) over time. (Addresses question 4) 
 
Our proposed work is relevant to the Planetary Science Division science goals. By modeling Europas evolution, we Explore and observe the objects in the Solar System to understand how they formed and evolve. We also assess the potential for life elsewhereby modeling processes that influence the heat and chemical energy available in the subsurface ocean. If our work confirms the habitable potential of Europa, then we may inspire a new wave of research on icy moons with similar characteristics to Europa, thus we "improve our understanding of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life in the Universe." Our work is timely given the anticipated launch of Europa Clipper in the mid-2020s. The geophysical and geochemical evolution of Europa has strong implications for formation time, metallic core size, and the potential for volcanism at the seafloor, which can be validated against gravity measurements.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Derek Richardson (PI) Joseph DeMartini (FI) 
Institution:  University of Maryland, College Park  
20-PLANET20-0069, Surface processes on low-gravity bodies with irregularly shaped particles 
 
The objective of this proposal is to make use of recent improvements to a state-of-the-art  gravity and granular dynamics code to put tighter constraints on previous investigations  regarding the rubble-pile nature of the surfaces of small solar system bodies. By treating  simulated particles as having irregular shapes more akin to real granular geometries rather  than approximating them as spheres as has been done in prior investigations, and by utilizing  models for interparticle cohesive forces for grains in contact, we expect to more accurately  reproduce the influence of packing, sonic attenuation, and granular flow (the motion of  bodies in a granular medium, e.g., gravel or sand) in shaping the surfaces of such bodies as  asteroids, comets, and the Moon. Processes influencing granular flow that we are proposing to  investigate include the so-called Brazil-Nut Effect (BNE). The BNE is a phenomenon of  granular dynamics in which frictional interactions between particles in a granular medium  cause larger blocks to rise to the surface when the medium is subjected to seismic shaking,  such as in the event of micrometeorite impacts on a small asteroid. Since the BNE is  influenced by the amount of void space for materials to move through in the medium, we also  aim to investigate how granular media pack to maintain structure despite large inferred  porosities. Once we have a clear picture of low gravity packing in granular media, we aim to  investigate how efficiently seismic waves can travel through those media. One would expect a  medium with a lot of voids to quickly attenuate seismic signals, but interparticle cohesion  may strengthen force chains and thus maintain paths for seismic waves to travel through.  These processes each influence the size, distribution, structure, and strength of particles  on bodies with granular surfaces, of which many  especially in the class of potentially  hazardous asteroids (PHAs)  are suspected to be self-gravitating aggregates of granular  materials. 
 
We will perform many suites of simulations over a parameter space spanning particle shape,  particle size distribution, interparticle friction, and interparticle cohesive strength, to  attempt to accurately recreate the way that grains stack, migrate, or transmit seismic  signals in low-gravity. With the proposed simulations, and by comparing with results, samples,  and images from recent missions to rubble piles like Bennu (OSIRIS-REx) and Ryugu  (Hayabusa2), we hope to understand the physics affecting surface processes on PHAs such as  the typical strength of shaking required to raise boulders like those seen on Ryugu to the  surface with the BNE, or why the OSIRIS-REx sample arm penetrated 0.5 meters into the surface of Bennu. 
 
This work will strongly benefit NASAs interests by providing a better understanding of the surface history of small solar system bodies. As many PHAs (asteroids large enough to cause regional damage in an impact and having orbits that can make a close-approach to Earth) are in the size range where they are suspected to be rubble-pile bodies, our research therefore firmly benefits NASAs goal of characterizing objects that may pose threats to Earth. Impact deflection methods can have widely varying success depending on the conditions on the surface of the target body. If, for example, we find that surfaces are typically highly compliant and energy does not transmit efficiently, kinetic impactor missions will need to expect lower momentum transfers to their targets, due to a reduction in ejecta. Or if we expect a PHA to have a large number of surface boulders, we may expect a different momentum transfer efficiency than if the surface is mostly dust. Understanding the surface processes on a PHA will be critical if we ever need to prevent a potentially catastrophic impact.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Kunio Sayanagi (PI) Justin Garland (FI) 
Institution:  Hampton University  
20-PLANET20-0126, Saturn's Equatorial Jet Through Reanalysis of Voyager Data Using a Modern Wind Measurement Method 
 
I propose to analyze images of Saturn captured by the Voyager and Cassini missions using consistent methodologies to investigate how the planets zonal wind speeds have evolved between 1980 and the Cassini era. Zonal wind as a function of latitude during the Voyager flybys has been retrieved by previous studies; notably, Sánchez-Lavega et al. 2000 (hereafter SL2000)s measurements using Voyager data have been treated as the standard wind profile of Saturn. Even though the SL2000 profile is treated as the standard zonal wind record, it is part of a longstanding discrepancy in the equatorial jet speed in which subsequent studies using Hubble Space Telescope and Cassini data have had trouble reproducing the SL2000 results. An issue worth reexamining is SL2000s application of manual wind measurement methods that returned only 2075 wind vectors, while newer analyses of Cassini data employ automated tracking algorithms and retrieve at least two orders of magnitude more wind vectors to determine the average zonal wind. No study has systematically analyzed the wind speeds during the Voyager flybys and the Cassini era using a consistent method.  
 
I propose to make new wind measurements and systematically compare Saturns equatorial wind speeds during the Voyager and Cassini eras using an automated 2D Correlation Imaging Velocimetry (CIV) cloud tracking technique. I hypothesize that the long-standing discrepancy in Saturns equatorial wind speed is either a result of systematic selection bias introduced by manual cloud tracking methods, vertical shear, or a combination of both. I expect that analyzing the Voyager datasets with modern, automated methods will help us better constrain previously published trends in wind profiles retrieved for the planet. I also aim to produce higherconfidence Voyager wind profiles for future studies than those currently available in the literature.  
 
My analysis aims to address the following objectives: 
1. Determine Saturns equatorial wind speed in 1980-81 using a modern cloud tracking method. 2. Examine if the slower equatorial jet speed observed by later missions is a true slowing of winds or a consequence of sensing different altitudes. 
The results of my project will directly answer the question in the Planetary Science Decadal Survey under the Workings of Solar Systems cross-cutting theme: How do the giant planets serve as laboratories to understand Earth, the solar system, and extrasolar planetary systems?My work will be useful in the formulation of improved general circulation models for Saturn, our other giant planets, and exoplanets. My research also addresses one of the Planetary Science Divisions science goals, as stated in Chapter 4 of the 2014 NASA Science Plan: Advance the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in our solar system operate, interact and evolve.My work will enhance the scientific return of the Voyager and Cassini missions.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Thomas Sharp (PI) Leah Shteynman (FI) 
Institution:  Arizona State University  
20-PLANET20-0165, The Effects of Planar Shock Microstructures on Zircon U-Pb Systematics and Implications for Terrestrial and Lunar Impact Dating 
 
Impact cratering occurs on rocky bodies across the Solar System, including the Earth and Moon. Cratering has played a significant role in the history of life on Earth: the hydrothermal systems created by ancient impacts may have provided habitats for the origin and evolution of early life, and impact events are correlated with mass extinction events. Looking at the lunar surface, its clear how big of a role impacts have had in its evolution. Dating impacts is essential to obtaining a better understanding of the Earth-Moon bombardment rate, periodicity, and calibrating absolute time scales. Currently, however, precise and accurate dating techniques are not applicable to the majority of impact craters due to a lack of dateable materials. In fact, as of 2020 only 36/190 confirmed terrestrial impact structures have reported ages in the literature with precision below 2%. New methods and a better understanding of impact processes are necessary to obtain more accurate and precise impact ages. A better understanding of the effect of shock microstructures on U-Pb systematics in the mineral zircon is key to moving forward in the impact dating effort. 
 
This work will investigate three shock microstructures in zircon identified as candidates for recording impact age: microtwins, reidite lamellae, and FRIGN zircon. The effects of these impact diagnostic microstructures on U-Pb systematics in zircon are not fully understood. Shocked zircon from Rochechouart and Clearwater West impact structures will be analyzed using focused ion beam (FIB), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). Boundaries of reidite and microtwins will be imaged using HRTEM in order to understand boundary structure and metamict damage. Because both reidite and microtwins are planar features, lamellae surfaces will be exposed for SIMS using FIB. Exploratory SIMS U-Pb analyses will be conducted directly on lamellae in order to determine whether they record impact ages. Lateral U-Pb profiles will be created in order to compare distribution of these elements within planar microstructures relative to adjacent host zircon. For FRIGN zircon, which variably shows partial U-Pb resetting, full resetting, or post-impact Pb-loss, electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging will guide SIMS U-Pb analyses of different crystal domains. This will allow for correlation of specific crystallographic orientations and/or metamict areas with degrees of U-Pb resetting. Interstices of FRIGN zircon will be searched for Pb phases using high resolution BSE imaging.  
 
This work relates to the main goal of the Planetary Science Research Program by advancing our understanding of impact cratering processes, which has played a significant role in the history of the Solar System. Advance scientific knowledge of the origin and history of the Solar System, the potential for life elsewhere, and the hazards and resources present as humans explore space. This work will address Planetary Science Research Program goals and the main goal of the Solar System Workings (SSW) program element, because shock occurs throughout the Solar System and impact cratering has the potential to facilitate emerging life, spread it between planetary bodies, and cause extinctions. To understand processes that occur throughout the Solar System, as well as those specific to individual objects and systems, but inform our understanding of the fundamental processes at work. Improve our understanding of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life in the Universe. This work will address controls on U-Pb system resetting in zircon, which addresses a SSW goal. [...]Characterize and understand the chemical, mineralogical, and physical features of planetary surfaces (such as geologic formations and impact craters)[...].  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Everett Shock (PI) Jordyn Robare (FI) 
Institution:  Arizona State University  
20-PLANET20-0140, Biosignatures: Thermodynamic Expression at the Interface between Life and Environment 
 
Objectives 
Geologic lipid biomarkers on Earth are buried inside sedimentary rock and preserved for long periods of time. Organisms modify the lipids in their cell membrane to withstand changing conditions. When geologic biomarkers are discovered, they give clues as to what organisms existed and what the environment was like, integrating the geologic and molecular records of life. Interpretation of past conditions from lipid biomarkers relies on the correlation of lipid structural features with environmental parameters. While much is known regarding the modifications that happen as temperature, pressure, and pH vary, the effects of redox conditions on lipid structure are understudied. We hypothesize that organisms in oxidizing environments will produce more oxidized lipids. This is because the thermodynamic stability of a lipid in an oxidizing environment will increase as it becomes more oxidized. Thus, the organism would exert less energy on synthesis, conserving it for processes that improve fitness such as reproduction. Should the hypothesis be supported, results will guide the interpretation of ancient environmental conditions from geologic biomarkers on Earth or alien worlds.  
 
Methods 
This hypothesis will be tested by characterizing the geochemistry and lipid composition in the thermal features of Yellowstone National Park. The thermal features provide a large spectrum of redox chemistry, some high in reducing chemicals from the magmatic-hydrothermal system, and others closer to equilibrium with oxidants in the atmosphere. We chose 45 springs with pH from 
2 to 8, a broad distribution of redox potentials, and temperatures above the limits for photosynthesis, based on our 20 years of Yellowstone data. Lipids will be characterized using high-performance liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. To account for the effects of changing microbial communities on the bulk lipid composition, we will sequence 16S and 18S rRNA genes. Once all data are collected, we will compare the average oxidation states of carbon in lipids to the redox chemistry of each spring, by calculating redox potentials and average oxidation states of dominant elements in the springs.  
 
Significance 
This research falls within the scope of the Planetary Science Division by improving our understanding of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life in the Universe by understanding modifications used by organisms to combat environmental change. In doing so, we are uncovering the pressures and adaptations that were necessary as life evolved on Earth. In addition, this knowledge will be used as a guide for determining the processes and conditions that create and maintain habitable environments and to search for ancient and contemporary habitable environments and explore the possibility of extant life beyond the Earth. By investigating complex environments like Yellowstone from a thermodynamic viewpoint, we are broadening the understanding of habitability by exploring energy supplies and redox potentials and how they affect microbial communities and their biomarkers. Furthermore, this work will enhance the scientific return of NASA Planetary Science Division missions through the analysis of data collected by those missions by building a framework for understanding biomarker structures as a response to environmental change, permitting answers to How can confidence in the interpretation of biosignatures be increased? asked in An Astrobiology Strategy for the Search for Life in the Universe (2019). This work directly responds to its statement that In the coming years, there is an urgent need to develop standardized methods for assessing the predictive value of biosignatures and address its recommendation that NASA should support the community in developing a comprehensive framework for assessment& to guide testing and evaluation of in situ and remote biosignatures.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– James Slavin (PI) Charles Bowers (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Michigan, Ann Arbor  
20-PLANET20-0027, Magnetic Flux Rope Formation Mechanisms at Mars and their Impact on Ionospheric Mass Loss 
 
Magnetospheres are formed by the solar wind interactions with objects throughout the Solar System. Studying Mars will produce a deeper understanding of planetary solar wind interactions at magnetized planets by observing complex plasma processes that differ from those at Earth. The Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) spacecraft has been in orbit around 
Mars since 2014 and has measured significant amounts of ionospheric plasma escaping down the Martian magnetotail to interplanetary space. However, the processes responsible for these losses remain poorly understood. Magnetic flux ropes (FRs), a by-product of magnetic reconnection between the interplanetary magnetic fields and the crustal magnetic anomalies and/or the steepening of Kelvin-Helmholtz waves on the boundary between the solar wind and the ionosphere of Mars, are characterized by their helical outer wraps and strong axial core fields. Reconnection at most planets occurs in an environment where ion-neutral collisions have a negligible effect on this process. However, at Mars solar wind pressure is expected to sometimes compress the mini-magnetospheres to lower altitudes where ion-neutral collisions broaden and slow reconnection sites and rates. FRs within the ionosphere connect to the downstream magnetotail and act as magnetic channels for ionospheric outflow. Individual flux ropes have been well documented, but further analysis is needed to fully understand the origin of FRs at Mars, their contribution to atmospheric loss and how the FRs dissipate or are lost to flow down the tail. An extensive study of Martian flux rope origins and properties is also required in order to understand the complexities of collisional magnetic reconnection at Mars, a process that has not been observed in situ in Solar System plasmas. Using data provided by the MAVEN spacecraft, we propose to conduct a comprehensive survey and detailed analysis of flux ropes in the ionosphere to answer three fundamental questions: 
 
Question 1: What are the origins of magnetic FRs in the Martian ionosphere, and how do the properties of FRs formed via different mechanisms (e.g., dimensions, orientation, core field strength) compare? 
 
Question 2: How does collisional versus collisionless magnetic reconnection affect the rate and nature of flux rope formation at Mars? 
 
Question 3: How do FRs dissipate in the Martian magnetosphere? 
 
Magnetic flux ropes are ubiquitous throughout the Solar System, and our study will contribute much to the rich field of Solar System magnetic field dynamics. Our proposed research will contribute to achieving NASA's Planetary Science Research Program primary objective of understanding the physical processes of planetary objects in the Solar System. Furthermore, our proposed work will increase the scientific return of the MAVEN satellite by expanding our understanding of the processes that govern the complex processes that couple Mars' magnetosphere and atmosphere. This understanding can be extrapolated back in time to determine the role of the Sun and solar wind in producing the current state of the Martian atmosphere.  ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Michelle Thompson (PI) Dara Laczniak (FI) 
Institution:  Purdue University  
20-PLANET20-0093, Investigating space weathering of carbon-rich asteroidal regolith through experimental simulations and returned sample analysis 
 
Space weathering is a phenomenon in which exposure to interplanetary space gradually alters the surfaces of airless planetary bodies. Bombardment by energetic particles from the sun (i.e., solar wind irradiation) and impacts by micrometer-sized dust particles (i.e., micrometeoroid bombardment) are the dominant space weathering processes that affect airless bodies in our solar system. These processes change the optical, physical, and compositional properties of planetary regolith and, in turn, complicate the interpretation of surface composition from remote-sensing data. Although previous research has investigated the effects of space weathering on the Moon and silicate-rich (S-type) asteroids, the planetary science community lacks a comprehensive understanding of how space weathering alters primitive, carbon-rich (carbonaceous or Ccomplex) asteroids. With the successful return of samples from asteroid Ryugu by the JAXA Hayabusa2 mission and the imminent return of samples from asteroid Bennu by the NASA OSIRIS-REx mission, the need for space weathering research focused on carbonaceous materials is immediate.  
 
The proposed research aims to understand how solar wind irradiation changes the optical, microstructural, and chemical properties of carbonaceous asteroidal regolith. In Task 1, we will simulate solar wind irradiation on C-complex asteroids in the laboratory by irradiating the Murchison CM2 carbonaceous chondrite with 1 keV H+ and 4 keV He+ ions. Although Murchison is not a perfect analog for target asteroids Ryugu and Bennu, this meteorite does exhibit important similarities to C-complex asteroids (e.g., a combination of silicate and organic components, low albedo), and, thus, is a suitable analog for this study. Next we will perform coordinated analyses on unirradiated and irradiated Murchison surfaces to understand how inorganic and organic components respond to simulated space weathering: (1) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy will evaluate changes in surface chemistry; (2) microprobe two-step laser-desorption mass spectrometry will monitor changes in organic functional group chemistry; (3) visible to near-infrared (0.3-2.5 µm) and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR; 2.5-14.3 µm) spectroscopy will identify spectral trends; (4) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) will identify microstructural modifications in olivine, pyroxene, and matrix phases; and (5) energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) will reveal variations in elemental abundance and distribution. In Task 2, we will use TEM and EDX to characterize the microstructural and chemical features of natural space weathered rims in olivine- and phyllosilicate-bearing regolith particles from asteroid Ryugu. By comparing simulated space weathering features in experimental analogs to natural space weathering features in Ryugu particles, this research will help us better understand the role of solar wind in altering carbonaceous asteroidal regolith. 
 
This study will be one of the first to synthesize laboratory experiments and returned sample analyses relevant to C-complex asteroids. Findings from this research will help maximize the science return of the Hayabusa2 and OSIRIS-REx missions and will improve models of space weathering throughout the inner solar system. In this way, the proposed project addresses the primary mission of NASAs Planetary Science Division by advancing our scientific knowledge of the origin and history of the solar system, specifically the evolution of primitive small bodies. Furthermore, this work relates to the scope of the Solar System Workings and Laboratory 
Analysis of Returned Samples programs of the ROSES-2020 NASA Research Announcement. – 
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Sonia Tikoo (PI) Ji-In Jung (FI) 
Institution:  Stanford University  
20-PLANET20-0157, Assessing Paleointensity Variability During the Lunar High Field Epoch 
 
Over the past decade, paleomagnetism and crustal magnetism studies have rapidly advanced our understanding of lunar magnetism. These studies suggest that the Moon generated a long-lived dynamo and produced a high surface field comparable to the Earths field today between approximately 3.9 and 3.5 billion years ago. This high field epoch(HFE) was also observed from the Apollo-era dataset but with one to two orders of magnitude dispersion in paleointensity values between coeval samples. Potential explanations for this large HFE fluctuation may include application of different paleointensity methodologies with varying robustness, shock demagnetization effects, or true lunar field behavior from dynamo processes, but the cause still remains uncertain. The objective of the proposed research is to assess the stability of the HFE dynamo field by conducting a paleomagnetic study that combines re-analysis of Apollo-era data with new measurements of lunar samples. Determining the origin of the paleointensity variability is particularly important because various proposed mechanisms (e.g., thermal convection, compositional convection, mechanical sources) can more readily explain the early lunar dynamo if, on average, a lower HFE field intensity is verified. 
 
Our goal will be accomplished via two tasks. Our first task is to evaluate the HFE field stability by quantitative analysis focusing on the pre-existing HFE paleointensity record. High-fidelity paleointensity results will be selected from Apollo-era and the modern HFE paleointensity datasets. We will constrain the effects of shock resetting of lunar rock magnetization by incorporating results from a pressure demagnetization study. Virtual axial dipole moment values from these filtered data will be calculated to compare paleointensity data from different samples from different landing sites, as well as to fluctuations in the Earths field over time. Our second task is to perform a paleomagnetic study on four Apollo 11 mare basalts. This task will investigate two lunar samples that are likely to have low paleointensities based on Apollo-era results, as well as two that have not been previously studied. Confirmation of weak paleointensities may support the existence of magnetic reversals and/or an intermittently intense dynamo. Task 2 will be conducted via room temperature demagnetization and paleointensity analyses, rock magnetic experiments, 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology, and electron microprobe analysis.  
 
This proposal seeks to address NASAs Planetary Science Division goals to explore and observe the objects in the Solar System to understand how they formed and evolve and to understand processes that occur throughout the Solar System, as well as those specific to individual objects and systems, but inform our understanding of the fundamental processes at work that are described in 2020 FINESST amendment (E.5. Section 2.3). This work will improve our understanding of lunar core processes and dynamo evolution. Furthermore, our paleomagnetic investigation on lunar HFE samples will use analog studies, laboratory experiments, or fieldwork to increase our understanding of Solar System bodies or processes and/or to prepare for future missions.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Francois Tissot (PI) Ren Thomas Marquez (FI) 
Institution:  California Institute of Technology  
20-PLANET20-0167, Mo isotope dichotomy in CAIs: Result of unrecognized biases or true clues to solar system evolution? 
 
Objectives: We propose to study the Mo isotope systematics of different types of CalciumAluminum-rich inclusions (CAIs) to better understand their formation histories and provide new constraints on material transport, accretion and disk dynamics in the early Solar System (SS). CAIs are the oldest dated solids in the SS and thought to represent the first phases formed during cooling of the solar nebula. The CAIs in CV carbonaceous chondrites exhibit a diversity of textural, mineralogical/petrographic, and chemical features. Mo isotope anomalies, which are powerful tracers of genetic relationships between SS materials, also show intriguing systematics in CAIs. Namely, recent work on Mo isotopes suggests that fine (fg)- and coarse- (cg) grained CAIs from Allende may have originated from genetically distinct source reservoirs. However, our preliminary data on one forsterite-bearing and one fluffy type A CAI show that more nuances exist, and preclude the idea of a simple bimodality between fg- and cg-CAIs.  
 
The overarching goal of the study is to establish a more general view of the Mo isotope systematics in CAIs and what it can tell us about their origins and ESS dynamics/evolution. Specifically, we aim to (1) understand the relationship between mineralogical/textural features to the observed Mo isotope signatures in CAIs, (2) measure the Mo isotope signatures of various CAI types from different parent-bodies to get a more complete picture of the Mo isotope systematics in CAIs, (3) acquire Al-Mg isotope data to provide key temporal constraints on the Mo isotope data and the origin/meaning of the large-scale bimodality observed between fg- and cg- CAIs.  
 
Methods: We assembled a comprehensive sample collection, reflecting the mineralogical, textural, and petrographic diversity of CAIs. To minimize biases due to parent body processes, we are targeting CAIs from various CV carbonaceous meteorites (CV-ox & CV-red). Methods/protocols for the different aspects of the project are outlined below:  
 
1)	To identify the possible influence of parent-body alteration and secondary processing on Mo isotope anomalies, the FI will examine the mineralogy of the CAIs using the SEM/EDS at Caltech. Special attention will be given to the presence of secondary phases as well as metal grains that could have a large influence on the Mo isotope composition of the CAI. Rare earth element patterns for each CAI will also be analyzed using the Q-ICPMS at Caltech to examine if the proposed trends between unfractionated vs. fractionated CAIs holds for other types of CAIs, as well as CAIs from meteorite parent-bodies other than Allende.  
 
2)	To constrain the origin of the materials from which CAIs formed, the FI will analyze the Moisotope compositions of the CAIs using the clean lab facilities and MC-ICPMS at Caltech. This task will leverage improved procedures developed by collaborator Budde (Caltech), which decrease sample mass needs compared to previous studies.  
 
3)	To put temporal constraints on the Mo isotope data, the FI will conduct in-situ measurements of the Al-Mg systematics using the SIMS instrument at UCLA. Measurements of the Al-Mg systematics on bulk CAI solutions will also be made to get model ages of different reservoirs from which different CAI groups were derived from. All of this work will be done under the guidance of collaborators McKeegan, Tang and Liu.  
 
Significance: The scientific objectives of the proposed work are in accordance with SMDs highlevel Objective 1.1 to Understand the Sun, Earth, Solar System, and Universeunder the 2018 NASA Strategic Plan. This work, which aims to understand the earliest solids in the Solar System, addresses the Planetary Science Division Science Goals to (i) Explore and observe the objects in the solar system to understand how they formed and evolve, and (ii) Advance the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in our solar system operate, interact and evolve.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Margaret Tolbert (PI) Marium Fernanders (FI) 
Institution:  University Of Colorado, Boulder  
20-PLANET20-0131, Chlorates and Perchlorates on Mars - Laboratory Studies of Water Uptake and Loss 
 
When searching for life elsewhere in the universe, scientists have mainly focused on finding liquid water, a key ingredient for life. However, in addition to liquid water, the presence of certain types of salts could also be a type of biomarker. Recent research has found that some types of terrestrial bacteria can survive in per/chlorate-rich salt environments by using these salts as an energy source. Additionally, the presence of soluble salts such as chlorate on the surface or in the sub-surface could allow water to persist under unfavorable or extreme conditions. The low eutectic temperatures and deliquescence ability of salts may be able to provide the habitable conditions for life on either the surface or in the sub-surface. 
 
Mars, like Earth, exists in the Goldilocks zone, an area around a star where planetary bodies are neither too hot nor too cold for liquid water to exist. However, liquid water has not yet been detected on present day Mars. With the help of salts, Mars may support liquid water on the surface or in the sub-surface through the process of deliquescence, during which a crystalline salt absorbs water vapor from the atmosphere and transitions into the aqueous phase. Chlorate salts have been found on Mars but are not yet well studied, especially at low temperatures relevant to Mars. This project will study the low-temperature deliquescence and efflorescence (when a briny droplet loses water through evaporation and transitions back into a salt crystal) of chlorate:perchlorate salt mixtures under Mars-relevant pressures and temperatures. I will also look at the effects of Mars-soil analogs on the water uptake and release by chlorates salts and their mixtures.  
 
To determine the conditions under which chlorates salt mixtures will deliquesce and eventually effloresce, I will use two instruments: a Raman-enhanced optical levitator and a Raman microscope attached to an environmental cell. In the environmental cell, the pressure, temperature, and humidity can be controlled to mimic Mars-like conditions. The Raman microscope will allow me to observe the phase transitions of a salt particle using visual and spectroscopic identification. The optical levitator allows me an independent measure of the phase transitions of the chlorate salt mixtures. The information will allow me to determine the deliquescence relative humidity (DRH), and the efflorescence relative humidity (ERH) of the chlorate salts and salt mixtures. By determining these fundamental properties as a function of temperature and pressure, we can then use NASAs Mars rover and satellite data to determine if there are conditions on Mars where aqueous salt solutions can exist, and possibly flow, on the surface or sub-surface.  
 
Because life as we know it requires liquid water, my project Chlorates and Perchlorates on Mars 
Laboratory Studies of Water Uptake and Losscontributes directly to NASAs Planetary Science 
Division goals: Advance the understanding of how the chemical and physical processes in the Solar System operate, interact and evolve, and Explore and find locations where life could have existed or could exist today. By studying the chemical and physical processes by which liquid water can form, we can improve our scientific understanding for the prediction of liquid water on Mars for future NASA missions. My data could be useful for scientists planning future missions who may want to locate or avoid liquid water on the surface or sub-surface. NASAs Mars 2020 mission will have a Raman instrument onboard as a part of the SHERLOC instrumentation package. My research can be used to help scientists find regions where chlorates might be present, possibly signaling where life and water might exist on Mars.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Tina Treude (PI) Jiarui Liu (FI) 
Institution:  University of California, Los Angeles  
20-PLANET20-0019, Do microbial methanogenesis and anaerobic oxidation of methane generate distinct clumped isotope signatures (13CH3D and 12CH2D2) of methane? 
 
Mass-18 methane isotopologues (13CH3D and 12CH2D2, aka "clumped isotopes") are a promising new tool to characterize sources of methane gas for solar system bodies in general. However, while appearing useful for determining the formation temperature of thermogenic gases, the distribution of isotopologues as predicted by their thermogenic equilibrium constant often deviates in microbially produced methane. The exact mechanisms driving deviation are currently elusive but suggested to be related to enzymatic reaction kinetics. It is therefore conceivable that microbial anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) would also create deviations in mass-18 methane isotopologue distributions, because the process operates with the same (reversed) enzymatic machinery used by methanogens, and because AOM has shown degrees of enzymatic back flux particular close to the thermodynamic limit. Here we propose to study the effect of AOM on mass-18 isotopologues using UCLA's unique prototype facility, the Panorama mass spectrometer, which is currently the most reliable instrument to separate between the two mass-18 methane isotopologues 13CH3D and 12CH2D2 and therefore adds a new level of diagnostic resolution. We ask the overall question if microbial methanogenesis and AOM produce distinct 13CH3D vs. 12CH2D2 signals that can be used as a prognostic tool to study the formation and alteration history of methane gas. Our studies will comprise a set of laboratory incubations with natural sediments to investigate the effects of AOM on the ”12CH2D2 vs. ”13CH3D space at different thermodynamic conditions, when consuming different methane gases, and during simultaneous microbial methanogenesis. Our research will generate critical new data for the characterization of methane sources, providing important applications to trace the origins of methane gas and detect the presence of microbial life on Mars and beyond.  
 
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
Darryn Waugh (PI) Lavender Hanson (FI) 
Institution:  Johns Hopkins University  
20-PLANET20-0033, Mixed-species clouds in Titans polar stratosphere 
 
A major discovery resulting from the Cassini-Huygens mission was the existence of cocondensed ice cloud in Titans stratosphere. These ice particles form when a variety volatile organic and nitrile species produced in Titans upper atmosphere descend through the winter polar stratosphere, and condense when they encounter very low temperatures. Once these ice particles form, they precipitate down through the stratosphere into the troposphere, potentially contributing to the surface geology, including possibly becoming solutes in Titans methane lakes. Therefore, knowledge of the formation and evolution of these clouds is important for understanding the flux of species to the surface. However, there are no existing cloud models that simulate the observed range of co-condensed ice species, and the impact of co-condensates on the vertical flux of organic and nitrile species to the surface has not been quantified. This proposal aims to address this gap, and the overall goal of this proposal is to develop a microphysical parameterization for co-condensed ice and to use this to determine the role of winter polar stratospheric co-condensed ices in the vertical flux of organic and nitrile species in the polar atmosphere.  I will develop a co-condensation parameterization to model Titan's polar clouds and implemented in a zero-dimensional cloud model and in the TitanCARMA onedimensional column model. Sensitivity simulations will be performed to estimate the impact of uncertainties in physical properties on the resulting cloud. Column model simulations will be guided by previously published observations of clouds in the northern- and southern-polar winter stratosphere and will provide insight into the impact of simultaneous condensation on the formation and sedimentation of cloud particles in Titans winter polar atmosphere. From the modeled composition and fall speeds of cloud particles, the contribution of co-condensation stratospheric cloud to the flux to Titan's surface will be estimated. 
 
The proposed work will fill a critical gap in our understanding of Titans polar stratosphere, and it will provide a new modeling tool for use in future studies of Titans atmosphere (as well for other bodies that have mixed-species ice condensation). These outcomes fulfill a FINESST goal of the Planetary Science Research Program to understand processes that occur throughout the Solar System, as well as those specific to individual objects and systems, but inform our understanding of the fundamental processes at work.  
